Cause, Manner and Circumstances of Death
Since the medical examiner/coroner's (MEIC's), main duty is to determine
the cause, manner and circumstances of death, specific definition of these
terms may be helpful.
The cause of death is the condition or sequence of conditions, e.g.,
injuries in road traffic fatalities (RTFs), that adversely acts on the human
body to result in death. The cause of death usually differs from the cause of
the traffic incident, which often involves some human behavioral factor (such
as drinking and driving), vehicular problem (such as faulty braking system)
or roadway or environmental condition (such as wet roadway during a rainstorm). A simple example of a typical cause of death that could apply to a
driver who died when the car struck a tree is:
Intrathoracic hemorrhage
Due to: Ruptured aorta
Due to: Blunt force injury of the thorax
Due to: Motor vehicle crash (This may be added here or in another
section of the death certificate that describes how the injuries
occurred.)
In essence, for RTFs, the cause of death is a medical description of the
injury event, bodily trauma and related fatal derangements that caused the
death.
The manner of death is a classification of death based on whether death
was brought about by an injury and whether the injury was intentional or
unintentional. The options for manner of death are natural, accidental,
homicide, suicide and undetermined. In an apparent RTF, any of these manners
of death may be applicable, although most are classified as accidents because
most are unintentional. A manner of death of "accident" does not necessarily
indicate that there has not been some violation of the criminal code.
The manner of death is classified as natural if death resulted solely from
disease or age-related processes. In some apparent RTFs there may actually
be no significant injuries and the apparent "accident" may have been brought
about by a fatal natural disease in the driver (such as a heart attack). For
example, a car being driven by an elderly person may be seen to gradually
move forward from a stop light and run into a tree with no indication that
the driver tried to avoid the crash. It may turn out that there are no significant
bodily injuries and that a myocardial infarction (heart attack) is discovered
at autopsy. In such a case, the manner of death would be classified as natural.
Cases such as this provide one reason why autopsies are commonly performed on drivers who die in apparent RTFs. In other cases, the vehicular
crash may be caused by a natural disease (heart attack leading to unconsciousness), although death is caused by injuries sustained in the crash.
If investigation determines that death did result from injuries sustained
in the road traffic incident and there is no indication that the crash was
caused on purpose (intentionally), the manner of death is classified as accident. In essence, death was unintentional or unpredictable and caused by
injury that occurred during the incident.
Some RTFs involve a specific intent of the driver to kill himlherself, such
as by running into a concrete bridge abutment at high speed. Although such
cases are uncommon, the manner of death would be classified as suicide if
sufficient facts could be developed during the investigation to show that the
victim intended to kill himlherself or do self-harm.
If the death of one person is intentionally caused by another person, or
the death of one person results from a volitional (voluntary) act of another
person, the manner of death is usually classified as homicide by the MEIC.
As far as RTFs are concerned, in most jurisdictions the manner of death is
classified as homicide only if investigation shows that the at-fault party was
intentionally trying to kill or harm the victim (such as intentionally running
over someone after an argument). However, most states have laws that specifically define "vehicular homicide," and the definition may apply even
though there was no specific intent to kill anyone. For example, a pedestrian
death caused by a drunk driver or an at-fault driver who flees the scene of
an accident may qualify for the legal definition of vehicular homicide.
Whether or not the MEIC classifies the death as homicide in such cases
depends on the extent of known facts, jurisdictional procedures and the
philosophy of the MEIC. Most MEICs, however, prefer to classify "vehicular
homicides" as accidents and let the district attorney and court decide if the
term "vehicular homicide" is applicable for court purposes and possible
prosecution.
In some cases, the manner of death cannot be determined. Injuries may
be minor and disease extensive. Or, there may be some indication of suicide
that cannot be proven with the preponderance of evidence. Other possibilities
exist as well, and in such cases the manner of death may be classified as
undetermined.
Thus, an apparent RTF may ultimately be classified as any of the five
manners of death: accident, homicide, suicide, natural or undetermined. The
need to determine manner of death is another reason why RTFs are investigated and why autopsies are commonly performed, especially on drivers and
pedestrians.
For statistical purposes, tabulations of "fatal traffic accidents" are usually
based only on those RTFs that have been classified as accidents. Of course,
if the manner of death has been classified as natural it means that the apparent
traffic incident did not actually cause death. Rather, death was due to natural
causes but the initial circumstances appeared as a road traffic incident and
possible RTF. Such a case would not be classified as an RTF because the road
traffic incident did not cause death.
Clarification of the circumstances of death from the MEIC perspective
is directed mainly at determining how and where the fatal injuries occurred.
For example, the death certificate requires that a statement be given to explain
"how injury occurred," the "place of injury," and the "address where injury
occurred.'' It is the MElC's responsibility to obtain complete and accurate
information about these data items. For example, the phrase "driver of car
in car-to-car head-on collision" might be used to explain how injury
occurred, the place of injury might be listed as "2 Lane County Road:' and
the address where injury occurred might be indicated as "Mile Marker 26,
Old Alabama Road."
The other major aspect of clarifying the circumstances of death from the
MEIC standpoint (other than determining the cause and manner of death)
is to determine what decedent factors may have played a role in the accident,
such as determining whether a driver or pedestrian was intoxicated at the
time of the incident. In general, the ultimate determination of whether vehicle factors or road and environment problems contributed to the incident is
the responsibility of the investigating law enforcement agency or traffic accident reconstruction specialist, not the MEIC.
RTF Investigation vs. RTF Reconstruction
There is a difference between road traffic accident investigation and reconstruction. In brief, from the MEIC standpoint, investigation consists mainly of
documenting the basic facts of the incident in order to determine the nature
of injuries and the cause, manner and circumstances of death, and to collect
evidence in appropriate cases where criminal acts may have been involved (such
as hit-and-run cases where the at-fault driver flees the scene). Reconstruction
is a more extensive endeavor that requires retrospective analysis of the facts
and the application of traffic engineering science to more fully clarify the crash
dynamics, vehicular/bodily movements and sequence of events. The basic
duties of the MEIC relate to investigation, not necessarily reconstruction. However, a general discussion of reconstruction may be helpful.
In his book, Motor Vehicle Accident Reconstruction and Cause Analysis,
Rudolf Limpert describes five specific objectives of traffic accident
reconstruction:
Collision analysis
Injury analysis
Accident avoidance analysis
Injury avoidance analysis
Accident causation ranking
Collision analysis includes documentation of the basic aspects of the
incident such as vehicle directions, speeds, impact points, crush damage,
rotations and final resting points. For the most part, this is what the investigating law enforcement officer documents during the routine investigation
of road traffic incidents.
Injury analysis is directed at description of how injuries were produced,
assessment of occupant motion and contact with the vehicle and other
objects, the role of safety devices and analysis of specific information on the
nature of bodily injuries. It is this last component that is mainly provided
by the MEIC through death investigation and autopsy.
Accident avoidance analysis is concerned mainly with analysis of factors
to determine if and how the accident may have been avoided or reduced in
severity.
Injury avoidance analysis involves investigation of all possible factors that
may be addressed to prevent bodily injury such as analysis of safety devices,
interior vehicle design and similar features.
Accident causation ranking is a method for ranking the relative importance of factors related to the driver, vehicle, roadway and environment in
having caused the incident.
Most routine traffic accident investigations include only basic collision
analysis (usually performed by law enforcement) and injury analysis to the
extent of identifying and documenting the nature of bodily injuries (usually
determined by the medical examiner, forensic pathologist or coroner's
pathologist). The other components of injury analysis, accident avoidance
analysis, and accident causation ranking are not routinely used and usually
come into play when the incident results in legal proceedings and subsequent
investigations by the parties in the case, or for automotive safety and design
studies and research.
Limpert also describes the basic elements of an accident reconstruction
as:
The facts section
The engineering analysis section
The witness statement section
The facts section generally includes information derived from observations and measurements related to any vehicles, the roadway and victims.
Such information is routinely obtained by the investigating law enforcement
agency in virtually all traffic accidents.
The engineering analysis section includes use of mathematical equations,
tests and data interpretation. Engineering analysis may not be routinely used
and is called into play in selected cases, although it is common for law
enforcement agencies to use some standard mathematical formulas for estimating vehicle speed and other parameters.
The witness statement section includes accounts of people who report
what they saw and heard (or what they think they saw and heard!). This is
an integral part of all traffic accident investigations but it must be remembered that witness accounts are often erroneous, especially in regard to estimated speeds. Witness accounts must be weighed against information
developed in other elements of the investigation.
Limpert points out that there is no formal course of study in traffic
accident reconstruction, and the basis for serving as an expert in this field
is a combination of adequate background education and experience in
doing the job. He states that a bachelor's degree in physicallmechanical,
automotive or civil engineering along with 2 years of accident reconstruction experience are viewed as minimal requirements to serve as an expert
witness in court. Many DIs, medical examiners and coroners may not
specifically meet these requirements, Thus, the challenges and duties of
traffic accident reconstruction frequently fall to parties other than the
ME/C or DI.
Finally, Limpert categorizes the basic components of road traffic incidents as:
Driver
Vehicle(s)
Roadway
Environment (which may include human objects, such as pedestrians)
In this book, we will concentrate on the various aspects of each of these
components that are particularly relevant to the MEIC or D1 when conducting investigations of RTFs. For an extensive discussion of traffic accident
reconstruction, the reader is referred to Limpert's book.
Jurisdictional and Statutory Considerations
In most states, the death investigation laws place injury-related deaths under
the jurisdiction of the medical examiner or coroner for the purposes of
investigation of the cause and manner of death and clarification of the circumstances surrounding death. Duties also usually include completion of
investigative reports, reports of postmortem examination (if any) and the
death certificate.
Because RTFs involve injury, they usually are investigated by the medical
examiner or coroner. However, not all states are the same. For example, in
Utah, the medical examiner does not have authority to investigate RTFs. In
other states, the medical examiner or coroner may have to certify such deaths,
but law may restrict the performance of an autopsy to selected types of
circumstances. The important point to know is that familiarity with local
and state death investigation laws and practices is extremely important so
that any death investigation is performed in compliance with the law and to
the extent needed based on specific case circumstances. Be sure to read the
death investigation laws that apply to the jurisdiction where you work. Most
coroners and medical examiners have copies of these laws. The laws also are
usually available from the Secretary of State and many states now have all of
their current statutes available on the Internet.
It is also important to know whether jurisdiction of the death investigation belongs to the county where the RTF occurred or the county where
death occurred; they may differ. Be sure to know the details of your own
state's death investigation laws. There also may be some areas such as federal
property, Indian reservations or other areas within the boundaries of your
jurisdiction that you do not have legal authority to investigate. Finally, the
law enforcement agency responsible for investigating RTFs may also vary
depending on state law and the type of road (interstate highway, city street,
etc.) or location of the roadway. Be sure to be familiar with all of these details
as they apply to the city, county, region or state where you will be investigating
RTFs.
Who Usually Does What?
In general, the law enforcement agency is responsible for documenting, diagramming and determining the basic circumstances and sequence of events
related to an RTF. Emphasis is on documenting the basic facts of the incident,
who was involved, who witnessed the event, who may have been at fault,
who was injured or killed, and who may or may not need to be taken into
custody for some violation of the law. Most law enforcement agencies use a
standard reporting form, based on a model uniform traffic accident report
form, which contains standardized questions about the vehicles, roadways,
people involved, the weather and a space for drawing a diagram of the
incident. In many jurisdictions, law enforcement officers who investigate
RTFs have had special training in traffic accident reconstruction and, in some
areas, police departments have specialists who do nothing but conduct investigations of RTFs. Of course, law enforcement officers perform these duties
in almost all motor vehicle accidents whether or not there is a fatality.
The MEIC or D1 is called in when a death occurs and is concerned mainly
with confirming that death has occurred, establishing the identity of the
deceased, examining the body, documenting its appearance, determining the
nature of wounds and disease that may be present to explain why death
occurred (and perhaps why the RTF incident occurred) and to determine
the specific cause, manner and circumstances of death for the purposes of
completion of the death certificate. The MEIC or D1 may also be responsible
for notifying the next of kin of the death, but in many areas this procedure
is done by the law enforcement agency. It should be determined at the scene
who will do the notification, and the notification should be documented in
the case record.
Proper coordination is needed between the MEIC (or the DI) and the
law enforcement officer investigating the incident. It is very important for
all involved parties to discuss in advance exactly who will perform which
tasks and take responsibility for them. In most cases, law enforcement is
responsible for controlling and investigating the general scene area and the
ME/C is responsible for the body and its immediate surroundings.
Basic Caveats
It is not our intent to provide extensive discussion of crash dynamics and
traffic accident reconstruction. However, there are a few basic principles that
generally hold true:
1. In general, when a large, heavy vehicle is in a collision with a smaller,
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
lighter vehicle, people in the smaller (lighter) vehicle will be at greater
risk for serious injury. (Basically, the bigger vehicle often wins.)
In general, people who remain in a vehicle are at less risk for serious
injury than those who are ejected from a vehicle. This is one reason
why front windshield glass is laminated so it cracks and deforms,
but does not usually shatter at relatively low speeds (less than 30
mph).
There are characteristic, somewhat predictable injuries that occur in
various types of RTF situations. (These are discussed below.)
Motorcyclists are at much greater risk (at least three times greater risk)
for fatal injury than drivers of cars because they have little protection
and they are usually ejected from the motorcycle, which also increases
risk of serious injury.
The potential for serious injury is often expressed in terms of the
change in velocity - usually referred to as "delta-V." For example, if a
person were driving at 60 mph and came to an abrupt stop when the
car hits a cement wall, delta-V would be approximately 60 mph. Using
equations, delta-V can be mathematically converted to other units of
force such as g-force (multiples of the force of gravity) or pounds per
square inch (psi). Human tolerance levels to injury forces expressed in
such terms (g-force or psi) have been well established. Thus, the nature
of injuries as determined by the MEIC may be used by the reconstructionist or engineer to estimate forces, calculate vehicle speeds or reconstruct various sequences in the incident - any or all of which may
become major issues in legal proceedings. This emphasizes how important it is that the MEIC or pathologist accurately describe and document the nature and extent of injuries on the body.
There are many terms that have very specific meanings and connotations in traffic accident analysis. Awareness of this is important so that
specific words are not misused or misinterpreted. For example, tire
marks on the roadway may be used to reconstruct vehicle movement,
speed, direction of travel, braking and other events. There are several
subtypes of tire marks, each of which has a specific connotation and
name, such as print marks, tire rubber prints, tread prints, imprints,
flat-tire marks, post-crash flat tire marks, yaw marks, grinding marks,
spin marks, skid marks, shadow marks, acceleration spin marks,
wheels-locked grinding marks and heating tire marks. Discussion of
these types is beyond the scope of this book, but it behooves the MEIC
or D1 to know that reconstruction terminology is complex and proper
knowledge is needed to use it appropriately - not just for tire marks,
but also for many other aspects of the investigation.
7. Drivers who cause fatal accidents and adult pedestrians who are struck
by vehicles are often intoxicated or otherwise impaired andlor acting
in a reckless fashion.
Motor vehicle "accident" reconstruction is a specialized area of expertise
that requires knowledge of engineering and physics. There are many selfproclaimed experts in traffic accident reconstruction and the MEIC or D1
definitely runs the risk of being asked questions that fall outside of hislher
scope of expertise. An immense body of knowledge exists about the biomechanics of bodily injury and vehicle damage that occur in vehicular accidents.
This atlas attempts only to address the very basic issues that the MEIC or D1
commonly addresses. MEICs and DIs are advised to be conservative in their
approaches to investigations and to be sure to refer questions and issues to
an appropriate expert with special knowledge, experience, and training for
the issue at hand.
General Classifications of RTFs
It is useful to classify deaths involving RTFs into the following, based on the
status of the deceased:
1. Driver (operator)
2. Occupant (passenger)
3. Pedestrian (on-foot, lying in roadway, etc.)
It is also helpful to classify the circumstances of the fatal event as:
1. Vehicle striking fixed object (may involve ejection)
2. Vehicle losing control with rollover (may involve ejection)
3. Collision of two or more vehicles; head-on, rear-end, side-impact ("T-
bone"), tangential, sideswipe (may involve ejection)
4. Vehicle impact with pedestrian
5. Vehicle enters an unusual and hazardous environment (submerged in
water, etc.)
on Questions to be Answered During RTF
Investigations
During the investigation of a RTF, the following questions are commonly
encountered. Italicized questions are those that the MEIC andlor D1 plays a
major role in addressing or answering:
Concerning the victim:
1. Was there some problem, disease or other factor involving the victim that
may have caused or contributed to the incident (such as intoxication,
heart attack before the crash, etc.)?
2. Was there any evidence that the incident was intentionally caused by the
victim (i.e., attempt to commit suicide)?
3. Is there any evidence that the trafic incident was the terminal outcome
of some other incident (such as the driver having been shot earlier)?
4. Was there any evidence that the victim was aware of the impending
incident and tried to avoid it (i.e., tire marks from applying brakes)?
5. Did injuries cause death, or did death occur before the crash?
6. How long did it take for the victim to die?
7. How long would the victim have been conscious and aware of pain after
the crash?
8. If the vehicle caught fire, did the fire play a role in causing death?
9. Which objects came into contact with the victim?
10. Which impacts caused or contributed to death?
11. Were there any injuries that appeared to be caused by safety devices such
as seat belts or air bags?
12. If a pedestrian in a hit-and-run incident, is there any evidence that may
be helpful in identifying a suspect vehicle (and driver)?
Concerning the vehicle:
1. Did any vehicular malfunctions or defects (steering system, braking
system, tire problems) cause or contribute to the fatal event?
2. Was there any evidence of malfunction of safety devices, such as seat
belts and airbags?
3. Is there any indication of a flaw in vehicular design or construction?
4. If the vehicle caught fire, did the fire start spontaneously from the
vehicle itself or from another source (such as arson)?
Concerning the environment:
1. Did any road conditions cause or contribute to the incident?
2. Did weather conditions cause or contribute to the incident?
3. Did any other factors such as lighting, signage or traffic control devices
cause or contribute to the incident?
It can be seen that some of these questions require information about
the body (autopsy) in order to be addressed; they are the primary responsibility of the MEIC. Others require careful scene investigation and evaluation
of the vehicle or other evidence that does not necessarily involve the examination of the body and may fall into the domain of the law enforcement
agency. In general, the D1 is concerned mostly with those questions that have
directly to do with the body and mechanisms of injury, while the law enforcement agency is usually concerned more with the factors involving the roadway, vehicle characteristics and environmental conditions. All factors are of
interest to, and must be considered by the MEIC or DI, but the extent of
concern and follow-up concerning the nonhuman factors necessarily fall
mainly to the investigating law enforcement agency.
Injuries Caused by SafetyIRestraint Devices
Injuries caused by seat belts typically include:
Abrasions andlor bruises on the skin surfaces in positions which correspond to where the belt comes into contact with the body
Fracture of the collar bone andlor ribs
Lacerations of liver or other abdominal injuries from "submarining"
under the belt
Occasional pelvic or spinal column fractures
Injuries caused by air bags are usually minor but may include:
Ejection from the vehicle (if seat belt not worn)
Blunt force injuries to small children, which may be severe or lethal
Facial, cervical or thoracic bruises, lacerations or fractures
Rarely: severe eye injury, airway trauma or lung collapse
Many airbags have a coating of talc or starch to facilitate opening of the
airbag. This material may be found on the skin of accident victims.
Basic Injury Mechanisms
RTFs generally involve one or more of the following types of injury.
1. Direct impact. This results from direct impact between vehicle com-
2.
3.
4.
5.
ponents and the body or the body and other objects. Typical examples
include a pedestrian being struck by a vehicle; a pedestrian body
impacting with other objects such as the roadway; or an occupant
sustaining a direct impact by intrusion of the door from an impact to
the side of the car, caused by another vehicle.
Deceleration injury. This occurs when the body is moving and then
comes to a sudden stop - usually when it impacts with some other
object. The body is "thrown forward" or continues in the direction of
vehicle movement, and impacts with vehicle components as a result
of the impact.
Positional injuries. The relative position of a vehicle and a human body
may cause death by virtue of the position in which the body ultimately
comes to rest. For example, a car may come to rest on a body, or a
body may be suspended or compressed in a vehicle in such a position
that the victim may not be able to breathe adequately. There may be
no significant disruption of tissues due to injury, but death may still
occur.
Exacerbation of underlying disease. Minor trauma may precipitate a
heart attack or other "natural" event. For example, we have seen a case
in which a passenger received minor injury in a "fender bender,"
opened the door and exited the car by himself, walked around for a
few minutes, then collapsed to the ground after suffering a typical
hypertensive hemorrhage in his brain, apparently brought about by
the stress of the seemingly "minor" incident.
Unusual environments. In some circumstances, the body (with or without the vehicle) may end up in a hostile and unsafe environment. For
example, a person who was ejected from a vehicle into a lake may
actually die from drowning or hypothermia.
For pedestrians, other classifications of injury type are also helpful.
1. Primary impact. These wounds are caused by direct initial impact of
the vehicle with the pedestrian.
2. Secondary impacts. These occur after the primary impact, usually when
the body is thrown onto the vehicle and impacts with the hood,
windshield or roof.
3. Tertiary impacts. These occur after secondary impacts and may result
from landing on the roadway or ground, or being struck by subsequent
vehicles.
It is important to realize that the direction in which a pedestrian's body
will travel after primary impact depends on where the pedestrian is struck.
If struck below the center of gravity (approximately waist level) while
standing or walking, the pedestrian will tend to be "under-run" by the
vehicle and have secondary impacts with the vehicle (such as the hood,
windshield, or top of the vehicle). If struck above the center of gravity
(above the waist) the body may be thrown forward in the direction that
the vehicle was traveling and is commonly run over. Vehicles with high
front ends (such as large trucks) tend to throw the victim forward, because
they strike the victim above the center of gravity, while those with lower
front ends (such as standard cars) tend to cause the pedestrian to fly up
onto the hood or windshield, because they typically strike the victim below
the center of gravity. Children are typically struck above their centers of
gravity and thrown forward and downward.
Most fatal injuries resulting from RTFs are due to blunt force impacts
that cause tissue disruption (bruises, lacerations, fractures, abrasions). Some
fatalities, however, may be due to other mechanisms such as asphyxia, sharp
force wounds (cutslstabs), other penetrating injuries, burns, smoke inhalation or rarer conditions. Specific injury types are described below.
Common but Critical Investigative
Several things can happen (or not happen!) during an RTF investigation that
can severely hamper the investigation or cause erroneous conclusions. They
include:
Failure to collect the clothing. It is important to safeguard and collect
the clothing, particularly when a pedestrian road traffic victim has
been taken to the hospital. The clothing may have markings (grease,
torn defects, paint, etc.) that enable reconstruction of impact sites,
clarification of the nature and pattern of injuries or comparison to
clothing fragments found on a suspect vehicle. Shoes may bear markings that indicate whether the foot (shoe) was on the gas or brake
pedal.
Failure to examine the helmet in motorcycle crashes. The helmet may
bear signs of impact when the head does not. This can be helpful in
reconstructing how injuries may have occurred.
Failure to review medical records and ambulance trip sheets. Especially
when death occurs in the hospital (which may be many days or weeks
after injury), examination of the medical records and ambulance trip
sheet may be the only way to assess the original injuries and their
outcomes and sequelae. In other cases, review of the medical record
may be important to assess the possibility that some problem with
medical treatment played a role in the death, or to distinguish between
traffic-related injury and injuries caused by medical treatment (such
as incisions, airway trauma from intubation, etc.).
Failure to review the police accident report. The report may contain
information that is very helpful in interpreting injuries. It is also
helpful to verify whether the "final" report contains facts that are
consistent with those initially obtained at the time of the incident.
Failure to obtain hospital specimens if death occurred at the hospital.
Blood and other specimens obtained at the time of admission to the
hospital may be the only suitable specimens for performing toxicology
or blood typing tests (to compare with blood at the scene or on a
suspect vehicle). They should routinely be obtained if death occurs in
the hospital after a traffic incident.
Failure to obtain an adequate background medicallsociallpsychiatric history. Especially in circumstances where there is no apparent reason for
the accident, in pedestrian deaths or when the victim was the sole
occupant of a vehicle and was apparently at fault, it is very important
to determine whether the traffic incident represented an act of suicide.
This may involve delving into the victim's psychosocial history and
obtaining appropriate medical records or other information from professionals who had treated or evaluated the victim.
Failure to investigate related scene locations. In some cases, especially
those in which suicide is a possibility, it may be necessary not only to
inspect the vehicle thoroughly for suicide notes, but also to inspect
the home, workplace, or other places recently visited by the victim.
Factors that Raise Suspicion of Suicide
Some circumstances should raise suspicion that the RTF was a suicidal act:
Dead-center impact in the front of the vehicle
No seat belt or safety devices used
High speed
No apparent reason for the crash
No evidence of attempts to avoid or brake
Collision into a heavy, fixed object
Nobody else in the vehicle
History of suicide attempts or gestures
Swerve into oncoming traffic for no apparent reason
Pedestrian fatalities in which victim is struck head-on, or was lying
on the roadway when struck, or appeared to have "jumped" or
"darted" into traffic
Suicide by motor vehicle may be very difficult to prove. Very thorough
investigation is required. Most states have laws, case law or legal opinion that
the weight of evidence required to classify the manner of death as suicide
cannot just be "more likely than not," but rather that the "preponderance of
evidence" (reasonable certainty) is the required burden of proof to classify a
death as suicide.
Typical RTF Injuries
Several types of injuries are classic and almost pathognomonic for, or
extremely typical of, specific injury mechanisms:
Glass dicing. These consist of angulated cuts on the skin caused by
tempered glass chips from shattered side or rear windows. They may
occur in vehicle occupants or pedestrians. The tempered glass in side
and rear windows is made to shatter into tiny pieces when it breaks,
and glass dicing is caused by this type of glass. It typically is seen on
the head or face.
"Brush burn" slidingabrasion (road rash). This usually consists of large,
map-like or streak-like areas of abrasion (scraping off of the skin's top
layer) caused by impact and gliding along the road surface. Depending
on the nature of the road surface, it may have a very distinctive appearance that reflects the character of the road surface, and may contain
adherent or imbedded particulate matter from the road surface.
Pebbling abrasions. These consist of multiple small, round-to-rectangular abrasions on the skin that typically occur in clusters and result
from impact on a rough road surface, such as asphalt (black top) or
surfaces with high gravel, stone or coarse aggregate content.
Glass scratches and superficial cuts. These usually consist of multiple,
parallel, usually vertical superficial cuts or scratches in the skin, often
accompanied by some abrasion. Glass scratches usually result when
the forehead or other body part impacts with the cracked glass in the
laminated front windshield and is caused by a gliding of the tissue
over the fractured glass. The front windshield consists of multiple glass
and plastic layers and is designed to crack, not shatter, and remain in
place at impact speeds of up to approximately 30 mph. This helps the
occupant to be retained in the vehicle rather than ejected (because
ejection increases the risk of fatal injury). It also prevents serious neck
and head cuts as a result of the head protruding through the glass.
Annular avulsions or decollement. This injury usually occurs when a
tire rotates on the skin, especially on an upper or lower extremity (arm
or leg). The rotational force of the tire causes the upper layer of skin
to be pulled away from deeper layers, creating a pocket-like space in
the tissues. In severe cases, all of the soft tissue may be pulled away
(avulsed) from the underlying bone.
Stretch injury. Especially in pedestrians or other victims who are run
over by vehicles, there may be injuries that represent extreme stretching of tissues. It is not uncommon for the skin of the groin to be split
open in pedestrians who are struck from the rear, and the abdominal
organs frequently bulge through the wound. "Acute stretch marks:'
similar in appearance to those sometimes seen on the skin of obese
people, but more yellow/red/orange in appearance, may occur in any
area of skin that undergoes severe stretching, as on the abdomen or
flank in pedestrians who are struck from the rear or when the skin is
extensively stretched by being run over by a tirelvehicle.
Tread marks. Impact by a tire, or being run over by a tire may result
in abrasions or bruises on the skin that leave a distinctive pattern from
the tire in question. Usually this occurs when people are run over, but
it may result from tire impact to an upright victim.
Traumatic fat necrosis pockets. Direct and extensive impact to soft
tissues may so traumatize the fat beneath the skin as to liquify it. This
may create palpable pockets beneath the skin, which contain liquified
fat that has the appearance of chicken broth. These pockets may also
contain significant hemorrhage or cause death by allowing fat to enter
the circulation and result in a fatal fat embolism (fat in the bloodstream).
Telescoped fractures. Particularly on the upper and lower extremities
(arms, forearms, thighs, legs) there may be fractures of the long bones
in which the fractured ends of the bones glide past each other causing
the arm or leg to become much shorter. These typically occur when
the thighs impact with the dashboard or the arms or forearms sustain
impacts end-on (along the direction of the bone).
Steering wheel injury. The steering wheel or center post of the steering
wheel may leave distinctive patterned contusions on the skin or cause
significant internal injury. However, distinctive wounds on the skin
surface are much less common than they were in the past because
steering columns are no longer rigid and now made to collapse on
impact.
Atlanto-occipital dislocation. The forces in many traffic accidents are
extensive enough that impacts to the face or head sometimes cause
complete fracturelseparation of the junction of the upper cervical
spine and base of the skull, which can cause fatal brainstemIspina1
cord injury. Lower cervical spine fractures are also common and usually result from hyperextension of the neck when the facelhead sustains
an impact. These injuries are relatively common in fatally struck
pedestrians.
Deceleration injury. The typical deceleration injury in a RTF victim
occurs in a driver or occupant of a vehicle that has sustained a frontend collision and comes to an abrupt stop. The typical and classic
finding is a chest full of blood caused by rupture of the aorta near the
junction of the left subclavian artery. This is often associated with
extensive rib fractures and fracture of the sternum. Typically, there are
transverse fractures of the sternum and bilateral, multiple rib fractures
that tend to occur along the anterolateral aspect of the ribs, but may
also occur elsewhere.
Bumper injuries. On pedestrians, these may include patterned contusions with a distinctive pattern on the skin, but more often consist of
fractures caused by direct bumper impact. They usually occur on the
leg below the knee and often are compounded with splitting of the
overlying skin. The height of the fracture above the bottom of the foot
may allow some estimation of whether the driver tried to brake. During extreme braking, the bumper may dip and cause fractures closer
to the ground than would occur if the driver was not braking. Thus,
measuring the exact location of these fractures is helpful. Sometimes,
however, similar fractures may occur if the foot is planted and the
body rotates, but there is not a direct impact at the fracture site. Thus,
fractures of the leg do not prove impact with a bumper. If bumper
fractures are present on only one leg or are present at different heights
on each leg, it may be that the pedestrian was walking or running
when struck. It has been stated that bumper fractures do not usually
occur unless the vehicle was traveling at about 15 mph or faster.
Hip fracture. In pedestrians or occupants whose leg or thigh is thrust
into the dashboard or other front wall component, the head of the
femur may be pushed out of its socket or the femoral neck may
fracture. This often causes the entire thigh and leg to have a shorter
appearance than normal and to be rotated away from the body.
Another injury produced by impact of the knee with the dashboard
is splitting of the distal femur by the patella (kneecap) being driven
in between the forked ends (condyles) of the femur.
Embedded materials. It is not uncommon for foreign materials such
as paint, plastic parts from vehicles or loose items on the roadway to
be pressed into or embedded in the skin or wounds. All efforts should
be made to ensure that these items are not lost during movement of
the body, as they may be critical in reconstructing the accident or
identifying a responsible vehicle.
Cardiac injuries. When there is a major blunt impact to the front of
the chest (anterior thorax), it is not uncommon for the anterior wall
of the right ventricle of the heart to tear, allowing blood to fill the
heart sac (pericardium).The wall (septum) between the right and left
atrium sometimes also tears with similar types of impacts. Occasionally, severe compressive impacts to the abdomen may be associated
with tears of the inner surface within the right atrium of the heart,
caused by transmitted hydrostatic forces overdistending the chamber
of the heart.
Other visceral injuries. Major blunt impacts also frequently result in
lacerations to the liver andlor spleen, and it is not uncommon for the
attachment points of the lungs (the pulmonary hilum) to be torn with
damage to the underlying blood vessels.
Pelvic fractures. The pelvis is essentially a ring-like bone that may
fracture when impacted, essentially breaking the "ring." Usually, there
has been a direct impact to the pelvis, but not always. Quite often, the
fracture sites are displaced and may tear adjacent blood vessels or the
urinary bladder.
Head injuries. In most fatal road traffic incidents there is often some
degree of head injury. This may consist of scalp hemorrhage or contusion only, but often includes extensive fractures of the cranial vault
(top part of the skull) or the basilar skull. It is not uncommon for the
fracture lines to be oriented along the direction of impact. Associated
intracranial injuries frequently include subarachnoid hemorrhage,
brain contusions, diffuse axonal injury and less often, subdural hemorrhage. It should be remembered that a fatal head injury may exist
in the absence of skull fractures and, occasionally, any external evidence of injury.
It is valuable for those who investigate RTFs, but whose duties do not
include performance of the autopsy, to attend the autopsy. This allows correlation of internal injuries with injuries and markings observed on the body
surface and with the circumstances of the incident. With experience, it is
often possible to accurately predict the nature of internal injuries based on
the findings observed on the body surface.
Artifactual Injuries
Always keep in mind that that the body may be accidentally traumatized during
rescue, extrication from the vehicle or transport. For example, the body might
be dropped by rescue personnel or struck by the force of a high-pressure fire
hose. Sparks that result from the cutting of nearby metal to extricate the victim
may cause unusual burns. Such possibilities always must be considered and
evaluated as appropriate for the case.
Preparing to Investigate
The National Guidelines for Death Investigation include a list of 52 items that
are considered basic equipment for potential use. They will not be relisted
here; the reader is referred to that publication for further information. In
most cases of RTFs, however, a camera, measuring tape, bags for collection
of evidence, sheets for use as barriers and for transport of the body, rubber
gloves, necessary transport items such as body bags, writing implements
(paper and pencil) and communication equipment such as radio or phone
are all that will be necessary. One must always be prepared for the worst. For
example, investigators may discover that an apparent driver fatality has a
bullet hole in the chest - in that case, the investigation abruptly changes
from a RTF investigation to a full-blown murder investigation. For such
reasons, a scene kit consisting of all items listed in the National Guidelines is
recommended.
Initial Procedures at the Scene
Upon first arriving at the scene, it is important to properly identify yourself
and all others at the scene, and to determine who will be responsible for the
various aspects of the investigation. Proper communication and cooperation
are essential to a proper investigation.
If the body is in public view, it may be necessary and desirable to construct a barrier of sheeting or other objects that block view of the body from
passersby. If the body is in such a position that it poses a safety problem, or
is in danger of further impact and mutilation, or is causing a significant
traffic flow problem, the body may be moved to a more desirable location.
However, the body should be photographed and the body should be outlined
in chalk or with some other suitable marking substance before it is moved.
Of course, it should be ascertained that the victim is indeed dead. Usually,
by the time the MEIC or D1 is notified, emergency personnel have made that
determination. However, it will be necessary to have death officially pronounced by a licensed physician or other person in accordance with provisions of state and local law. In many areas the MEIC or D1 may pronounce
death, but knowledge of state law is essential.
Primary Investigative Tasks
The MEIC or D1 must perform the following tasks at every RTF scene:
Establish scene safety.
Confirm that a death has occurred.
Perform or arrange for pronouncement of death.
Collect information to establish the identity of the deceased.
Collect basic demographic data (age, race, sex, address).
Determine who will notify the next of kin; notify if needed.
Safeguard the body and associated personal property and potential
evidence.
Arrange for or perform body packaging and transport.
Determine the reported facts of the incident as determined by the law
enforcement agency and compare with personal observations.
Determine and document (or perform) relevant measurements related
to primary and subsequent impact sites and ultimate location of bodies and vehicles. If possible, use the "triangulation" method in which
each object's location is measured from the same two fixed points.
Photograph relevant findings which, at a minimum, include the body
in its final position, any damaged areas on the vehicle, and any points
of impact of vehicle or body with other objects.
Document the status of vehicle glass (intact, cracked, shattered, etc).
Determine if there are any tire marks, especially prior to initial impact
site.
Document identifying features of vehicles (color, make, model, VIN,
tag number).
Determine if there are any indications of possible suicide or homicide
and follow up appropriately (see above).
Determine if there appears to have been adequate impact(s) to cause
death or if death appears to be more likely due to natural causes.
Assist the law enforcement officer in the location and interviewing of
witnesses.
Determine if the victim was on the job at the time of the incident.
Prepare a written report including necessary diagrams.
Notify other agencies as required (highway department if a road problem exists, etc.).
Provide assistance to families (referral for grief counseling, etc.).
If the victim was a driver or other occupant of the vehicle, some additional tasks are needed:
Attempt to identify and document any points of contact between
victim(s) and vehicle interior. This may be helpful not only to clarify
how injuries occurred, but also - especially when driver andlor occupants are ejected - to help establish who was the driver and the
seating locations of other passengers.
Determine if vehicle is in gear and, if so, which one.
Determine if headlight control switch is on.
Determine if there is any evidence of seat belt use, air bag deployment
or damage to safetytrestraint devices.
Determine status of doors (open, closed) prior to manipulation by
responders.
Examine gas and brake pedals for damage or markings; collect brake
and gas pedal pads for comparison with possible marks on footwear.
If the victim is a pedestrian or there is evidence of a body having been
run over:
Attempt to determine all impact sites with vehicle(s) and other objects,
being sure to take adequate photographs.
Inspect underside of vehicle for blood, tissue and clothing.
Document the make and model of the tires, including photographs
of relevant tread patterns.
If there is dismemberment or bodily fragmentation:
Attempt to locate and obtain all fragments, body parts and tissues.
If bodies were ejected from the vehicle:
Measure, diagram and photograph precise locations of bodies relevant
to vehicles and other objects.
Attempt to identify and document all impact points after ejection.
Examine vehicle interior to determine if there is any information to
establish victim seating location.
As needed :
Collect clothing (and helmet, if a motorcycle incident).
Collect hospital admission blood.
Get copies of medical records, ambulance trip sheets and incident
report prepared by the law enforcement agency.
Obtain further background medical/social/psychiatric information on
victim.
Conduct investigation of other relevant scene locations (home, work
site, etc.).
Overall Goals of the Investigation
Although the MEIC or D1 may not be primarily responsible for determining
all of the facts below, at the conclusion of the investigation, the MEIC andtor
D1 should have ascertained or have a reasonable understanding of:
The identity of the deceased
Demographic data about the deceased
A reasonable understanding of how the incident occurred and the
probable roles of the driver, vehicle, roadway and environment in
causing the incident
The specific nature and extent of injury
Whether there is any indication of homicide, suicide or natural death
How specific injuries were sustained (mechanisms)
The cause and manner of death
The type of place and address where the incident occurred
Whether the victim was a driver, occupant (passenger) or pedestrian
The basic categorization of the crash (car hit fixed object, car-to-car
head-on collision, etc.)
The Autopsy and Toxicology Testing
It should be apparent that there are several reasons for performing a complete
autopsy when the victim was a driver or pedestrian. This should be done as
a matter of routine procedure, if consistent with the law. Whether or not a
complete autopsy is performed on other occupants (passengers) depends on
the law, available resources and the circumstances of the incident. It is good
practice to perform an autopsy on all traffic fatality victims, if possible. In
some areas, however, this may not be practical or possible. When such is the
case, it is prudent to perform an autopsy if the facts of the incident suggest
that there will be criminal prosecution. Autopsy is also desirable if it seems
likely that a civil lawsuit may stem from the incident and applicable laws do
not preclude an autopsy.
Toxicology testing should be performed on drivers and pedestrians.
Which substances to test for depend partially on whether the investigations
provide evidence of specific drug use. Ethanol should be routinely tested for.
If possible, a drug screen for cocaine, opiates, amphetamines and tranquilizerslsedatives should also be included. It is also prudent to test for carbon
monoxide to exclude leakage of exhaust into the passenger compartment. In
cases suspicious for suicide, additional tests for psychiatric medications and
antidepressants may also be helpful. The extent of toxicology testing on
vehicle occupants depends on the case, but routine testing for alcohol and
common drugs of abuse (cocaine and opiates) is also reasonable.
References
1. Limpert, R., Motor Vehicle Accident Reconstruction and Cause Analysis (4th
ed.), Charlottesville, VA: The Michie Company, 1994.
2. U.S. Department of Justice,National Guidelines for Death Investigation, Washington, D.C.: National Institute of Justice, December 1997.
3. Spitz, W. and Fisher, R., Medicolegal Investigation of Death (2nd ed.),
Springfield, IL: Charles C Thomas, 1993.