Acknowledgments
The idea for a book that would examine the concept of causation from a legal and
medical perspective grew from discussions between Michael Ashby and the
second editor and then between the two editors. What ensued was a non-
adversarial forum for inter-disciplinary discussions and mutual education
relating to medical and legal understanding of causation. A residential "round
table" Symposium on Causation in Law and Medicine involving thirty-four
invited participants took place in November 1999. Sir Zelman Cowen, who
graciously agreed to be the Patron of the Symposium, delivered the opening
address. The core of the book comprises the edited papers delivered by the
speakers at the Symposium but a number of other chapters have been included in
the collection to ensure that a rounded coverage has been given to the subject
matter. We are grateful to the Symposium participants and to the authors who
were prevailed upon to contribute further chapters to the collection for their
generosity, patience and co-operativeness with queries and requests from the
editors, sometimes in difficult circumstances.
We also wish to thank Professor Philip Clarke, Dean of the Faculty of Business
and Law, Professor Jean du Plessis, the Head of School of Law, and Roger
Gamble, the Associate Head of the School of Law, Deakin University respectively
for their generous assistance, without which the Symposium would not have
eventuated. We are also indebted to Dr Heather Wellington through whose good
offices the Commonwealth Department of Health and Aged Care agreed to co-
sponsor the Symposium. Professor Jane Stapleton provided Dr Mendelson with
guidance throughout this undertaking and she is deeply grateful for her
encouragement and advice. As ever, the support and counsel of Professor George
Mendelson, and the insights derived from the dinner table discussions with
Hannah and David Mendelson have been invaluable.
Our heartfelt thanks go out to Mrs Lorna Frick who has prepared the
manuscript for publication, weeding out inconsistencies, standardising citations,
fonts, and English expression. She has also prepared the Table of Cases and the
Bibliography.
Professor Freckelton also records his ongoing appreciation for the tolerance
and good will shown by his wife, Helen Maloney, and his children, Leo and Julia
Freckelton, as well as for the helpful suggestions of his colleague Marilyn
McMahon at La Trobe University.
Most of all, we are grateful to the authors whose book this is.
Ian Freckelton and Danuta Mendelson
May 2001