3 The Cause of Disease and Illness:
Medical Views and Uncertainties
PETER GREENBERG*
Studies concerning the cause of "disease" (pathological state) and "illness"
(subjective state) reflect our needs to comprehend, prevent, treat, prognosticate
and accept. Assumptions about causation are made by individuals and society,
both to attribute blame and to provide a rational basis for compensation. In this
chapter, the strengths and limitations of scientific approaches to causation and
the differences between medical and legal approaches are reviewed.
Historical Background: Scientific Knowledge Versus
Popular Beliefs
Contemporary medical views about "cause" are founded on the ancient Greek
principle of determinism.1 All events, including diseases, are perceived as
consequences of natural laws and earlier circumstances. Teleological notions
about fundamental purpose, which were felt to be of great importance before the
Renaissance, are no longer considered relevant. The development of empiricism
in Britain during the eighteenth century meant that concepts of causation were
subsequently based on observation and experience, not just hypothesis.
Perceptions about causation at various times throughout history only partly
depend on scientific and technological knowledge. The obvious contributions of
diet, physical and chemical injury and inheritance to disease and illness were
recognised from the dawn of time. Epidemics of infectious diseases especially
were sometimes attributed to incorrect causes. Syphilis, the "French Pox" of 1492,
first had astrological and astronomical explanations. Some believed syphilis was
due to divine intervention, "a just and proper sentence for sins".
Scientific knowledge does not exist in isolation. It is "framed" by current
philosophical, cultural, religious, political and sociological ideas.2 Beliefs are
stronger with recently recognised diseases and when scientific foundations are
weak. In the early 1980s, when the cause of AIDS was unclear, as with syphilis
400 years before, there was speculation about divine intervention. When "cures"
by surgery became technically possible, it was considered that a "wandering
womb" explained hysteria and that "focal sepsis" in the tonsils or colon caused
systemic disease. A current belief is the popular view, not supported by scientific
evidence, that "stress" plays a significant causal role in cancer.3
Framing contributes to differences in beliefs about causation between
individuals and communities and their advocates, including courts of law, in spite
of the scientific evidence. Furthermore, beliefs may lag behind or ignore scientific
progress. Consider "chronic fatigue syndrome". Although patients with similar
symptoms were described in the second half of the 19th century,4 the condition
only attracted widespread medical and lay interest following apparent epidemics.
In 1987 it was given this particular diagnostic label at the time that HIV and
AIDS were attracting public interest. Similarities with HIV/AIDS were noted. It
was felt, with minimal scientific evidence, that "chronic fatigue syndrome" also
had an infectious and immunological basis. Another example is the idea that
disease and illness are caused by "multiple chemical sensitivity". The validity of
"multiple chemical sensitivity" is debated, but beliefs persist.5
Sometimes even the name of a disease determines myths about causation.
"Multiple chemical sensitivity" implies there is no alternative explanation.
Repetitive strain injury (RSI) implies that injury is the cause. The substitution of
this name for an earlier name, "tenosynovitis", at least removed the implication of
an inflammatory basis.
Nosological constructions themselves can be causes of illness. Psychosomatic
"merries", which are based on constructions of otherwise unexplained diseases or
illnesses, may spread amongst susceptible individuals, rather like infectious
diseases.6 Under such circumstances, the naming process can be the main cause
of the disease.
Factors determining discrepancies between lay and scientific views include the
strength of entrenched beliefs, the dissemination and acceptance of both scientific
knowledge and beliefs, and the zeal of stakeholders. The media play a critical role
in dissemination of both scientific knowledge and of beliefs. The media are much
more influential now than they were in Caxton's time, when syphilis first became
widely recognised.
Cause can never be unequivocally proven in a scientific sense. The scientific
method involves creation of hypotheses, which are then tested and sometimes
rejected. It is the failure of rejection of hypotheses that confirms scientific
validity. As in all applications of science to medical thought and practice, the
issue is not the absolute likelihood of cause, but rather the probability of a
particular factor being relevant to cause. Reichenbach extended David Hume's
concept of coincidental occurrence: "The happenings of nature are like rolling dice
rather than like revolving stars; they are controlled by probability laws, not by
causality, and the scientist resembles a gambler not a prophet".7
Questions about causation can always be regressed until a more fundamental
question that cannot be resolved is reached. Although genetic constitution and
external influences must ultimately account for all disease, subtle interactions
and complexities mean that scientific knowledge can approach the target of 100
per cent certainty regarding causation but can never reach it. Scientists take a
pragmatic approach. "When we think we have found an approximation to the
truth, in the form of a scientific theory which has stood up to tests better than its
competitors, we shall, as realists, accept it as a basis for practical action, simply
because we have nothing better (or nearer the truth)."8
An important limitation of the scientific approach is that currently accepted
"causes" may not explain all cases. An example is ischaemic heart disease. Known
"risk factors" such as family history, high blood pressure, smoking, and high
blood lipid levels account for only about half of the prevalence.
Single or Multiple Causes?
Scientific knowledge framed by beliefs does not completely explain
disagreements about causation. In discussing cause of death, Cordner has
helpfully described philosophical differences in the views about causation.9 Hume
(1711-1766) felt that a cause must be both necessary and sufficient, but JS Mill
(1806-1873) argued that the concept of cause should comprehend the totality of
conditions in which an event occurs.
The views of individuals and communities are also shaped by the importance
attached to "reductionist" rather than "holistic" approaches. Reductionism
attributes disease to its individual components. An example of a reductionist
approach is Occam's razor: "It is vain to do with more what can be done with
fewer." In contrast, holism acknowledges the complex and sometimes occult
interactions between the various individual components. One holistic model, the
biopsychosocial model,10 views disease as a very complex interaction of a number
of systems, both above (eg couple, family, culture) and below (eg organs, tissues,
cells) the system level of the individual person (Figure 1). Alternative and equally
compelling explanations for disease and illness often reflect the relative
weighting given to reductionist versus holistic approaches.
There may also be disagreement about the relative contributions of multiple
possible components to causation. Estimations of relative contributions are often
sought to quantify "blame". Even the very best combinations of reductionist and
holistic approaches produce only crude estimates, especially when known causal
factors do not account for all cases, and when some causal factors are
controversial.
Additional considerations apply when there are multiple causal factors, Causes
may be linked with one another. It may then be necessary to dissect out the more
fundamental and independent factors. An example is that both obesity and
physical inactivity may be seen as causes of maturity-onset diabetes, but
inactivity itself aggravates the tendency for obesity. Furthermore, some causes
may only be apparent when other causal factors are present. A meal of fava
beans may result in sudden anaemia due to red blood cell destruction, but only in
persons who are genetically predisposed.
Questions about causation need to be specific. Do we require an estimation of
the relative contribution of possible causal factors, or an assessment of the
contribution of one particular factor to the totality of factors relevant to
causation?
Scientific Views of Causation
Current scientific views on causation arise from hypotheses based on clinical
observations made in individuals and groups. Hypotheses are confirmed using
hypothetico-deductive reasoning by the application of epidemiological methods.11
In studies of causation, the following criteria, some of which were suggested by
JS Mill ("Mill's Canons") and consolidated by Bradford Hill,12 strengthen the
likelihood of a linkage between a possible cause and the subsequent development
of a disease (Figure 2).
None of these criteria are sufficient on their own. Exceptions can be found for
each. It is the strength of the individual criteria, as well as the strength of their
combinations, which determines the likelihood of a cause-disease relationship.
The cause precedes the outcome.
This is clearly inadequate as a sole criterion. It is problematic when there is
lengthy interval between exposure to a causative event and the development of a
disease. Consider two conditions: mesothelioma, a malignancy of the tissue lining
the surface of the lung, and the human equivalent of "mad-cow" disease. There
are many years between exposure to asbestos or to infectious material in brain
tissue before either condition develops. Such long latent periods may obscure
causal relationships.
The cause/outcome association is consistent across time, and
consistent in different patient groups and different geographical
and other settings
The greater the number of examples of the association, and the more reproducible
it is in different circumstances, the greater the likelihood of a linkage between a
cause and a disease.
There is a relationship between the likelihood, and/or the
severity of the disease, and the magnitude of the cause
A "dose-response" relationship clearly increases the strength of the association.
Examples are the relationships between the number of cigarettes smoked and the
subsequent risk of lung cancer, and the level of serum cholesterol and the
likelihood of coronary heart disease. But a dose-response relationship is not
invariable. Some causes have a threshold effect, in which the chance or severity of
disease is not increased once a critical threshold has been passed, such as
anaphylaxis (severe allergic response) from penicillin.
The cause/disease relationship is biologically plausible
Plausibility makes causal factors more likely to be correct, but only if associated
with other criteria. There is a real danger, especially when conclusions are based
on weak criteria, in accepting conclusions largely from the theoretical possibility
of a plausible mechanism, which could account for the association. Plausibility
may reflect fashions, which wax and wane. It was quite plausible in the Salem of
1692 to consider possession by demons as the cause for curious behaviour of
young women. Another problem with relying on plausibility is that one plausible
mechanism may be accepted whilst others are overlooked. Even if psychosocial
stress contributes to coronary heart disease, there could be two plausible
mechanisms, a direct effect of "stress" and an independent effect mediated by the
chemical substances in cigarettes smoked in response to "stress".
The apparent cause/outcome relationship is not a reflection of
bias and confounding
There have been few experiments where people are randomly allocated to
"experimental" or "control" groups and then deliberately exposed to possible
harms in order to prove that a potential cause was indeed responsible for a
disease. Most of the scientific evidence about causation therefore comes from
observational studies, although randomised studies of interventions likely to be
beneficial sometimes provide sound evidence of harm as well. Critical appraisal
of data is needed to ensure that the apparent linkage between cause and disease
does not have alternative explanations, which reflect weaknesses of observational
compared to experimental studies.13 The essential problem is that an association
between an apparent cause and a disease does not necessarily imply
cause/disease linkage. There may be other explanations.
For instance, it was noted that some patients who had breast augmentation by
the introduction of chemical substances into the breast area seemed to develop
connective-tissue diseases. One way of establishing a cause-disease relationship
would be a "cohort" study which compares the prevalence of connective-tissue
diseases in patients following breast augmentation with "controls", who are
similar in other respects, but who did not have the procedure. Alternatively,
cause-disease relationships could be established by a case-control study. Patients
with connective-tissue diseases and a control group are studied and the
prevalence of the augmentation procedure in the cases and controls noted. In
drawing conclusions from either of these observational studies, it is essential to
ensure that the cases and controls were indeed similar in all other respects,
including their predisposition to "connective-tissue" disease. Otherwise an
alternative explanation, unrelated to the augmentation procedure might account
for the differences observed between the groups. In addition, the possibility that
it is whatever makes a woman choose to have chemical augmentation, rather
than the augmentation procedure itself which causes the problem, needs to be
excluded.
There is a specific relationship between the apparent cause and
the subsequent effect
Cause could be firmly established if one cause was always followed by one
disease, and if one disease was always a consequence of a particular cause, but
there are notable exceptions. In tuberculosis and AIDS, for example, infected
patients always harbour the relevant micro-organism yet many people exposed to
the organism do not develop the disease. The microorganism is therefore
necessary but not sufficient. In the past, tuberculosis was considered to be caused
by particular socio-economic circumstances. A similar case could now be made
for HIV disease in socially deprived urban areas of the United States.
The same cause may also result in different expressions of disease. During
poliomyelitis epidemics some people do not become infected at all. In others,
infection can be demonstrated by tests and yet the person can be unaware of any
symptoms. Some infected persons may have an influenza-like illness yet others
develop paralysis. The determinants of the differences in the way the same
disease is expressed are unclear, and there are many possible explanations.
Depending on the specificity of names used to describe diseases, there are
examples of diseases having multiple apparent causes. Thus "hepatitis" may be
caused by Hepatitis A, B, or C virus, or by Epstein-Barr virus, which more
commonly produces the clinical syndrome we recognise as glandular fever.
"Purpura", a descriptive term rather than a disease, may have many causes.
"Chronic fatigue syndrome" is much more likely to be a common response to a
variety of causal contributions than a single disease entity.
Prevention or specific therapy directed to the cause prevents or
cures the associated disease
Examples include the prevention of infectious diseases like smallpox and
influenza by immunisation, arid the correction of diseases due to lack of
hormones (eg under-active thyroid gland) by administering the deficient
substance. This finding alone is certainly not sufficient to establish causation.
Many diseases and illnesses resolve spontaneously and so improvement cannot be
necessarily attributed to interventions.
The scientific studies of causation are applicable to this
particular person14
Subtle, and often occult, differences between individuals may mean that
scientifically-defined causes that have been found to be relevant in a group of
persons studied may not apply to a particular person. Thus perhexilene, a drug
sometimes used to treat angina pectoris (chest pain) in patients with ischaemic
heart disease, is likely to cause side-effects in only some patients, those who
metabolise it slowly.
Evidence Based Medicine
Although medicine has always had a scientific basis, there has been a recent re-
emphasis on these foundations. The Evidence-Based Medicine (EBM)
movement,15 which originated in Canada and in the United States, has now been
embraced internationally. As a consequence, physicians expect an even firmer
requirement for evidence regarding diagnosis, prevention, treatment, prognosis
and causation.
Proponents of EBM indicate a paradigm shift away from a hierarchical and
and
approach
based
dogmatic
largely
on
pathological
physiological
considerations and experience, to a paradigm based mainly on evidence.
Judgments about the value of opinions are now made less on the status of the
opinion-holder, intuition and historical precedents, and more on the scientific
evidence. The value of experience is not completely ignored as the practice of
EBM involves integration of the practitioner's clinical expertise and judgment
with the best available evidence.
Evidence is classified according to its level (Figure 3). 16Thus evidence on
causation which is based on only one or several anecdotes is judged as less
valuable than evidence based on a larger series. Evidence obtained from
comparative studies with historical controls is at a higher level. Case-control
studies and studies with concurrent controls are at a higher level again. Although
the level of evidence is even higher if there is pseudo-randomisation, or better
still, formal randomisation, such high levels of evidence are seldom achieved in
studies of causation because of ethical requirements to avoid deliberate harm.
An evidence based approach to causation involves the following four steps:17
Asking the right question about this cause and this disease
Questions should be specifically directed to the current problem. For example: Is
there any possible causal link between this cause and this disease? How likely is a
causal link between this cause and this disease? If there are many possible causal
factors, what is the likely contribution of this particular causal factor? Does this
factor act independently of other factors?
Searching for the evidence
An important outcome of the EBM movement has been consensus concerning the
value of the particular elements selected from the wide range of evidence
sources.18 Books are limited by their publication date. Readily updatable
electronic versions of texts, both "on line" (eg "Harrison's on line") and on CD (eg
"UpToDate") are now available. Primary sources of published data (eg Medline),
are very comprehensive but relatively difficult to search. Highly valuable and
more easily searched secondary sources such as "Best Evidence" ("on line" and on
CD) provide useful information on causation. A systematic search involves
retrieval of all relevant publications. This can be time consuming as it involves
searching numerous texts and databases including publications in many
languages.
Critical appraisal of the evidence
In order to answer questions about causation, material obtained through
comprehensive searches must be critically appraised for validity. Essential criteria
for validity include consideration of whether groups being compared were indeed
similar except in regard to the possible cause, whether outcomes and exposures
were similar in both groups, and whether meaningful time and dose-response
relationships apply. In addition, the strength of the association between cause and
disease and the precision of the estimation of risk are important in interpreting
results.19
Applying the general evidence to a particular person
"Applicability" refers to the implications of evidence obtained from other people
in different settings to a particular person in a particular setting.20 One cannot
assume that the results of a study linking a possible cause with a disease apply to
the particular person under consideration. It is useful to begin by asking if there
are compelling reasons why the results of the study should not apply to this
particular patient. Possible reasons include differences in genetic predisposition,
gender, age, inclusion and exclusion criteria, settings, use of medications, and
other "co-morbidities" (eg medical, social and psychological circumstances).
Additional reasons are differences in the degree of exposure to the possible cause
and how the disease outcome was measured and detected.
For all of these reasons it is more difficult to express an opinion about
cause/disease linkage for an individual than for a group.
The contemporary emphasis on evidence in medicine increases the likelihood
that possible causes and their relative contribution to disease are considered,
detected and correctly weighted. It is acknowledged that EBM approaches have
limitations. They should be seen as absolutely necessary although sometimes
insufficient to establish firm cause/disease relationships.
Changing Concepts of Causation
Scientific information concerning causation is not static and can expand
dramatically over short periods of time.
Causes
In recent years the combination of sophisticated technological advances and
epidemiological studies of populations has strengthened knowledge about the
critical influence of both genetic predisposition and infection as causes of
diseases.
Genetic constitution is now seen to be a much stronger causal factor than
previously recognised. It is relevant in conditions as diverse as bipolar affective
disorder, maturity-onset diabetes, osteoporosis, cardiomyopathy and "auto-
immune" diseases. Genome analysis is progressing rapidly. There are now known
to be specific genes for some relatively rare diseases and several genes
determining risks for more common diseases like ischaemic heart disease. Even
when a specific genetic factor is found, estimates of its likely contribution to a
disease may change over several years. A genetically determined vitamin D
receptor is considered to account in part for osteoporosis, but initial estimates of
its contribution were excessive.
The manner in which genes can influence causation is diverse. Genes may not
only determine behaviours (eg excessive alcohol consumption) that increase the
probability of certain diseases, but also the extent and manifestations of
consequences of behaviours, such as the spectrum of diseases resulting from
alcoholism. Genetic composition can protect individuals against infection (eg
HIV21and tuberculosis).22
In addition to newly recognised infectious diseases (eg Legionnaires disease,
Lyme disease, HIV), a new role for infection in conditions not previously known
to have an infective basis is now established. Helicobacter pylori infection
underlies the predisposition to peptic ulcer disease. There is strong but
inconclusive evidence to suggest that infection plays a significant role in common
chronic inflammatory joint diseases and even in ischaemic heart disease. There
may be direct interactions between micro-organisms and genetic structures:
retroviral particles like HIV become incorporated into host cell nucleotides and
replicate when cells divide.
Diseases
Tuberculosis
Infection with specific mycobacteria is essential for the development of
tuberculosis. Both the risk of developing and the clinical expression of
tuberculosis depend on factors in the micro-organisms and the potential host, as
well as in the environment where host and micro-organisms meet. Tuberculosis
strains vary in virulence.23 Individual risk for and expression of tuberculosis
depends on genes24 and on immunological responses. These are partly genetically
determined but may be modified by present (eg HIV) and possibly past infections.
Medications (eg glucocorticosteroids like "cortisone"), immunisation and
nutritional status may also affect responses.
Mycobacterial infection is necessary but far from sufficient to cause
tuberculosis. Environmental factors such as access to suitable food, overcrowding
and ventilation are important. Death rates from respiratory tuberculosis in
England and Wales began to decline from the middle of the nineteenth century,
50 years before the causal mycobacterium was recognised, and 100 years before
specific immunisation and treatment became available.25
Ischaemic Heart Disease
Although there are many contributory causes for ischaemic heart disease (eg
genes, hyperlipidaemia, cigarette smoking, sedentary life style, obesity, and other
diseases such as hypertension and diabetes), recognised "risk factors" only
account for about 50 per cent of its prevalence. In recent years the possible role of
micro-organisms (eg chlamydia) and the likely contribution of specific types of
psycho-social stress in the workplace, such as lack of control over decision-
making, have been considered to be causal.26 At present it is not known how
these complex factors interact to "cause" disease and illness in any individual.
Summary of Medical Views concerning the Cause of
Disease and Illness
Studies across the spectrum of disease and illness suggest the following
aphorisms:
Disease results from a subtle and complex interaction of multiple causes.
Disease and possibly illness as well may be modified by psychosocial
experiences, especially early-life experiences;
Genetic constitution contributes significantly to the range, risk, severity
and response to disease, as well as to interactions with environmental
causes;
Causal factors in "illness" and "disease" may operate at all
biopsychosocial27 system levels;
Given an inherent genetic constitution, physical, chemical, infectious and
psychosocial causes interact to produce disease. The response is then
subsequently modified by individual endocrinological, immunological
and other responses. The experience of disease as illness is further
modified by psychological and sociological responses.
Differences Between Medical and Legal Views about
Causation
Diversity in views about linkages amongst causal factors and disease has been
referred to previously. There are differences between individual practitioners
from the same profession and between professional groups. Differences between
legal and medical views sometimes reflect the historical characteristics of systems
that have evolved to resolve disagreement. Although the necessity for courts to
provide pragmatic and timely resolutions is clear, it is sometimes difficult for the
scientific medical practitioner to comprehend legal decisions regarding causation.
This is especially so when decisions with extensive repercussions are apparently
made without scientific evidence or in spite of it. The problem is accentuated if
previous decisions are not revised as new evidence becomes available.
Consider the possible health risks of breast implants and the "interplay
between medical science, law and public opinion".28 Breast augmentation was
initially undertaken by direct injection and then by inserting siliconegel implants.
About twenty years afterwards, anecdotes about connective tissue diseases
affecting implant recipients were reported. Legal proceedings followed. Large
settlements in the United States were made against implant manufactures on the
basis of anecdotes in the absence of more scientific evidence. Soon after this the
United States Food and Drug Administration banned breast implants, not because
of demonstrable health risks, but because the manufacturers were unable to
produce evidence that prostheses were safe. Two years later, as a result of more
expensive settlements against them, the implant manufacturers agreed to a
$US4.25 billion class-action settlement. The largest manufacturer, Dow Corning,
filed for bankruptcy protection and in late 1999 a United States District
bankruptcy judge approved Dow Coming's plan to settle for $3.2 billion. In 1996
in an outstanding review of this case Angell concludes: "For now, however, we
can say that the accumulated evidence that shows any link between breast
implants and a variety of systemic diseases and symptoms is very small, if it
exists at all."29 Recent publications support this view.30
Sometimes the fear of litigation, possibly because of doubts about the capacity
of legal processes to address scientific material fairly, may have striking
consequences. "Bendectin" ("Debendox" in Australia), a drug mixture containing
several constituents, was extensively used to treat nausea in pregnancy. It was
withdrawn by the manufacturers when case-reports suggested possible foetal
malformations. Although by current standards its efficacy is equivocal, a drug of
probable value to many pregnant women is no longer available. The data on
possible toxicity were only anecdotal.31
What are the fundamental differences between legal and scientific standards
for proof of causation? The medical approach, especially in this era of Evidence
Based Medicine (EBM), is to review the available evidence, graded according to
its scientific level, and then to apply this to the case at hand. The legal approach
is quite different: "In contrast, a court may approach the issue from the
standpoint of the presumptive inference which a sequence of events inspires in
the mind of any common sense person."32 Although there is no absolute certainty
about the validity of either approach, the scientific approach often requires more
"hard" evidence than the legal utility of "presumptive inference", and is less
subjective.
The present legal paradigm is more like the medical paradigm that preceded
EBM. It is relatively hierarchical and based more on authority than scientific
evidence. "Medicine is a science and law is not. Developments in medicine are
made by experiment and observation; in law they are made by the decisions of
legislatures and judges. A medical fact is one which can be empirically supported
or clinically determined; a legal fact is one which is more probable than other
countervailing facts."33
There are three elements of contemporary British, United States and Australian
legal systems which tend to accentuate disagreement:
The adversarial nature of the systems
Contesting parties have no obligation to present all relevant evidence. They are
entitled to present selected and potentially favourable evidence to the court.
Furthermore, in contrast to the European inquisitorial model, the vision of the
court, except in exceptional circumstances, is limited by the material presented by
the adversaries. The judge cannot "... ferret out the truth in any absolute sense ...
In our system the question is not 'What is the truth of the matter?' ... because the
issue is whether the party carrying the burden of proof has discharged it".34
The selection, qualifications and roles of expert witnesses
Experts may be specifically chosen to present favourable opinions: "These
witnesses are usually required to speak, not to facts, but to opinions; and when
this is the case, it is often quite surprising to see with what facility, and to what
extent, their views can be made to correspond with the wishes or the interests of
the parties who call them".35 The capacity of the expert may be seen as very
broad indeed. "... it follows that a medical practitioner nearly always is permitted
to give evidence on any branch of medicine."36 Problems arise when "experts"
undertake the very difficult task of extrapolating from the general issue to the
particular case in the absence of significant past or ongoing clinical experience,
and when the main emphasis in court is about their qualifications and status,
rather than their evidence. The role of the expert is quite clear. "The expert's task
is twofold. First, to furnish basic scientific or technical data. Second, to present
inferences and conclusions from the facts which the judge or jury, for lack of
specialised knowledge, cannot draw themselves. The expert is introduced to carry
the proof to the conclusion for which the party presenting the evidence
contends."37
The relationship between the expert and the court is also unequivocal. "The
expert evidence should give the medical or scientific basis and if appropriate the
statistical likelihood of the requisite connection but it is then up to the jury to say
whether the connection is established to their satisfaction."38
The way in which the quality of evidence is assessed
Structures to ensure that evidence is sound may be seen as fairly fragile: "Up to
the present, Australian law has not contained any criterion for evaluating the
quality of expert evidence as a threshold element to be satisfied as a test for
admission. In the average case, where there is a conflict of medical evidence, the
dispute is most often about a commonplace medical condition in which
specialised support for any of the assertions that might be made are readily
found. In the unusual case, the most novel proposition will have its adherents,
who may compensate in vehemence for what they lack in scientific authority."39
The clear communication of evidence about causation remains problematic.
"There is the obvious danger that an expert when asked to provide an opinion as
to whether a causal link exists may do so in terms of scientific proof that may be
altogether too exacting for the degree of satisfaction necessary in a legal
proceeding."40
Resolving Differences in Views about Causation
Responsibilities to our communities might be improved and professional
disagreement reduced by:
Accepting the historical evolution, strengths and weaknesses of current
approaches to causation;
Understanding the process of disease-framing and the role of influential
stakeholders;
Re-defining the role of the "expert witness";
Evaluating the scientific quality of evidence presented in legal
proceedings, and clearly distinguishing facts from opinions; and
Improving communication both between professional groups and between
professionals and the broader community.
Figure 1
Adapted from GL Engel 1980.41
Figure 2
Adapted from RB Hill.42
Figure 3
Adapted from NHMRC 1999.43
* Clinical Director, General Medicine, at the Royal Melbourne Hospital, and a Principal Fellow in the
University of Melbourne Department of Medicine.
1 B Russell, History of Western Philosophy, 2nd edn, Routledge, London, 1961.
2 CE Rosenberg & J Golden, Framing Disease: Studies in Cultural History, Rutgers University Press, New
Jersey, 1992.
3 R McGee, "Does Stress Cause Cancer?" (1999) 319 Brit Med J 1015.
4 E Jones & S Wessely, "Case of Chronic Fatigue Syndrome after Crimean War and Indian Mutiny"
(1999) 319 Brit Med J 1645.
5 GE Simon, W Daniell, H Stockbridge, K Claypoole & L Rosenstock, "Immunologic, Psychological, and
Neuropsychological Factors in Multiple Chemical Sensitivity: A Controlled Study" (1993) 119 Ann
Intern Med 97.
6 SE Ross, "Memes as Infectious Agents in Psychosomatic Illness" (1999) 131 Ann Intern Med 867.
7 H Reichenbach, The Rise of Scientific Philosophy, University of California Press, Berkeley, 1951.
8 K Popper, Unended Quest, Fontana-Collins, Glasgow, 1976, at p151.
9 SM Cordner, "Deciding the Cause of Death after Necropsy" (1993) 341 Lancet 1458.
10 GL Engel, "The Clinical Application of the Biopsychosocial Model" (1980) 137 Am J Psych 535.
11 AS Feinstein & RI Horwitz, "Double Standards, Scientific Methods, and Epidemiological Research"
(1982) 307 N Eng J Med 1611; B Russell, History of Western Philosophy, 2nd edn, Routledge, London,
New York, 1961.
12 AB Hill, "The Environment and Disease: Association or Causation?" (1965) 58 Proc R Soc Med 295.
13 KS Trout, "How to Read Clinical Journals IV: To Determine Aetiology or Causation" (1981) 124 Canad
Med Assos J 985: M Levine, S Walter, H Lee, T Haines, A Holbrook & V Moyer, "Users' Guides to the
Medical Literature IV: How to Use an Article about Harm" (1994) 271 J Am Med Assoc 1615; MA
Levine, "Readers' Guide for Causation: Was a Comparison Group for Those at Risk Clearly
Identified?" (Jan-Feb 1992) 116 Am Coll Phys Journal Club A-12.
14 AL Dans, LF Dans, GH Guyatt & S Richard, "Users' Guides to the Medical Literature XIV: How to
Decide on the Applicability of Clinical Trial Results to Your Patient" (1998) 279 J Am Med Assoc 545.
15 Evidence Based Medicine Working Group, "Evidence Based Medicine: A New Approach to the
Teaching and Practice of Medicine" (1992) 268 J Am Med Assoc 2420.
16 National Health and Medical Research Council, A Guide to the Development, Implementation and
Evaluation of Clinical Practice Guidelines, NHMRC, Ausinfo, Canberra, 1999.
17 DL Sackett, SE Strauss, WS Richardson, W Rosenberg & RB Haynes, Evidence-based Medicine. How to
Practice and Teach EBM, 2nd edn, Churchill Livingstone, London, 2000.
18 Ibid.
19 M Levine, S Walter, H Lee, T Haines, A Holbrook & V Moyer, "Users' Guides to the Medical Literature
IV: How to Use an Article about Harm" (1994) 271 J Am Med Assoc 1615.
20 AL Dans, LF Dans, GH Guyatt & S Richard, "Users' Guides to the Medical Literature XIV: How to
Decide on the Applicability of Clinical Trial Results to Your Patient" (1998) 279 J Am Med Assoc 545.
21 G Stewart, "Chemokine Genes – Beating the Odds" (1998) 4 Nature Medicine 275.
22 R Bellamy, C Ruwende, T Corrah, KPWJ McAdam, C Whittle & AVS Hill, "Variations in the NRAMP1
Gene and Susceptibility to Tuberculosis an West Africans" (1998) 338 N Eng J Med 640.
23 SE Valway, MPC Sanchez, TF Shinnick, I Orme, T Agerton, D Hoy, J Scott Jones, H Westmoreland & IM
Onorato, "An Outbreak Involving Extensive Transmission of a Virulent Strain of Mycobacterium
Tuberculosis" (1998) 338 N Eng J Med 633.
24 Bellamy, Ruwende, Corrah, McAdam, Whittle & Hill, op cit, n22.
25 T McKeown, The Modern Rise of Population, Edward Arnold, London, 1976.
26 H Hemingway & M Marmot, "Evidence Based Cardiology: Psychosocial Factors in the Aetiology and
Prognosis of Coronary Heart Disease: Systemic Review of Prospective Cohort Studies" (1999) 318 Brit
Med J 1460.
27 Engel, op cit, n10.
28 M Angell, "Evaluating the Health Risks of Breast Implants: The Interplay of Medical Science, the Law,
and Public Opinion" (1996) 334 New Eng J Med 1513.
29 Ibid.
30 C Cooper & E Dennison, "Do Silicone Breast Implants Cause Connective Tissue Disease?" (1998) 316
Brit Med J 403; EC Janowsky, LL Kupper & BS Hulka, "Metaanalyses of the Relation Between Silicone
Breast Implants and the Risk of Connective Tissue Diseases" (2000) 342 N Eng J Med 781.
31 LB Holmes, "Teratogen Update, 'Bendectin'" (1983) 27 Teratology 277.
32 H Gerber, "Lipovac v Black: was Dr Black Negligent?" (1999) 170 Med J Aust 550.
33 G Samuels, "Medical Truth and Legal Proof: Changing Expectations of the Expert Witness" (1998) 168
Med J Aust 84.
34 Ibid.
35 Ibid. See generally I Freckelton & H Selby, Expert Evidence: Law, Practice and Procedure, 2nd edn, Law
Book Co, Sydney, 2002.
36 G Samuels, op cit, n33.
37 Ibid.
38 Dahl and Anor v Grice [1981] VR 513, Young, Kaye, Gobbo.
39 G Samuels, op cit, n33.
40 Tubemakers of Australia Ltd v Fernandez (1976) 50 ALJR 720, per Stephen J.
41 Engel, op cit, n10.
42 Hill, op cit, n12.
43 National Health and Medical Research Council, op cit, n16.