Preface
SIR ZELMAN COWEN
This book is devoted to one of the most profound yet vexing issues in law,
namely how to accommodate advances in the medical and scientific
understanding of causation within the province of law. It is probably true to say
that medical evidence, and inferences drawn from observation, experiments and,
nowadays, statistics, allow, or enable, medical science to develop theoretical
models and explanations of medical conditions. Modern medical theory and
practice accepts that happenings of nature, including medical conditions, are
multifactorial, and as such are more likely to be controlled by probability laws
than by a single cause. In law, finding the causal connection between a wrongful
act and harm is essential to the attribution of legal responsibility. However, as
Kirby J observed in Chappel v Hart (1998) 195 CLR 232; [1998] HCA 55 [87], both
civil law and common law courts
have searched for principles to provide a "filter to eliminate those consequences of the defendant's
conduct for which he [or she] should not be held liable". The search sets one on a path of reasoning
which is inescapably "complex, difficult and controversial". The outcome is a branch of the law which is
"highly discretionary and unpredictable". Needless to say, this causes dissatisfaction to litigants, anguish
for their advisers, uncertainty for judges, agitation amongst commentators and friction between
healthcare professionals and their legal counterparts.
This volume addresses these serious concerns, and provides a framework for
analysis of different theories of medical, scientific and legal causation as well as
modes or tests relating to the proof of causation offered in different forensic and
medical contexts.
Notions of risk in determining causation in criminal and civil law, the nature
of proof in medicine and the law, issues of morality, responsibility and justice in
the context of legal causation, as well as aspects of causation pertaining
specifically to forensic medicine and coronial law are analysed from an
interdisciplinary perspective. Several chapters contain an exposition of judicial
and academic thinking regarding the underlying values and principles of legal
causation, and the object and function of causal inquiry. Physicians explore issues
of aetiology and pathogenesis in relation to medical assessment of probability of
risk, the nature of proof in evidence-based medicine, and the function of
perceptions and framing relating to death causation. In the process, conceptual
uncertainties which beset medical and legal causation are clarified, and
consideration is given to evidentiary principles that should govern the forensic
process in this area of the law.
The collection is a comprehensive, illuminating, and at times controversial
contribution to the current debates on the subject of medical, scientific and legal
causation.
The Right Honourable Sir Zeiman Cowen
AK, GCMG, GCVO, QC, DCI