Part A:
The Concept of Causation in Law,
Medicine and Science
1 Principles and Values Underlying the
Concept of Causation in Law
ANTONY HONORÉ*
Introduction
What principles and values underlie the concept of causation in law? This brief
discussion of a far-ranging question will concentrate on values. Of special interest
to the consideration of causation in law and medicine is whether different values
underlie the concept of causation in the two disciplines. I argue that the values
underlying the concept are the same in both, but that the values underlying law
and medicine differ. A consequence of this is that law and medicine are
concerned with different types of cause and use the concept for different
purposes.
Some values hold good outside law and medicine. They are important in
everyday life even in areas which are no concern of either. Others are values of
the legal system, in particular of adjudication. An example is procedural fairness.
Without procedural fairness adjudication is unjust. And healing and the relief of
suffering is a value specific to medicine. In my view, however, no value underlies
the concept of causation in law or causation in medicine as such. The notion of
cause is the same in law, medicine, science and everyday life. This point is one
that common law judges have often stressed, when they say that causation in law
is a matter of common sense. Whether one thing has caused another is to be
judged by criteria that prevail outside the law.
Three topics will be dealt with in the light of this distinction between values
that mark everyday life and those specific to law or medicine. These topics are
causation, responsibility and legal liability. The concept of cause dominates our
inquiries into the processes by which things happen, or have happened.
Responsibility for good or bad outcomes of human conduct forms the link
between causation and legal liability. It is central to the assessment of people's
lives and doings, their successes and failures. But both causation and
responsibility, though important in law, are concepts drawn from everyday life.
The third topic is specific to law. It concerns the conditions that, in the interests
of fairness, limit the extent to which people can be made liable for causing harm.
It may help to list at the outset the values that will be mentioned. In my view
those that underlie causation concern the external world, which is, within limits,
conceived as objective, regular and knowable. The knowledge that we acquire
with its help enables us to survive in an uncertain world. That we should be
responsible for our conduct and its outcome serves a different set of values. It
encourages people to act in a way that will lead to good outcomes and it
promotes a sense of personal identity. The restrictions on legal liability for harm
caused to others rest on various aspects of fair adjudication, especially fair
procedure. Fair adjudication is obviously not a medical value. Though the
concept of cause is also not specially medical, its role in providing explanations of
disease and recipes for cure is crucial to medical science and practice.
Values Underpinning the Concept of Cause
To take Kant as a starting point, causation can be thought of as a category, like
space and time, built into our make-up. We cannot help conceiving the external
world in terms of it. If Kant is right, it follows that it is an across-the-board
notion, applied not only in law but in science, medicine, history, ethics, politics
and, if it comes to that, cricket. The concept of cause is the same in every sphere
of life. That the moon's shadow caused the eclipse of the sun; that the defendant's
speeding caused the plaintiff's trauma; that the Plasmodium parasite caused the
patient's malaria; and that Steve Waugh's leadership was the cause of Australia's
victory in the World Cup – all apply the same notion. Causation is an all-purpose
tool for inquiring into the relation between one event and another.
Some philosophers and lawyers conceive the cause of an event as a necessary
condition (sine qua non) of the outcome, others as a condition that, along with
others, is sufficient for the outcome. Whichever view is preferred,1 a cause is
something like an ingredient in a recipe: an element in a combination that, if
repeated, will yield a similar outcome. Both views presuppose that we can
generalise about the way things happen. We can say that when conditions A, B
and C are present together this will lead in stages to D but that if A is absent and
only B and C are present D will not follow, at any rate not by the same stages.
Observation and experiment pick out the conditions that in combination
consistently give rise to processes that yield a given outcome. The recipe idea has
been refined to such an extent that with its help a rocket can be dispatched to
Jupiter in the reasonable expectation that it will get there at a given moment. At a
more mundane level the recipe idea applies to medical therapy. Given the
patient's condition (A and B) doctors try to find a treatment (C) that will result in
a cure. And if causation can be used in a forward-looking way to provide recipes
it can also be used in retrospect to explain events, for example to diagnose illness.
To say that one thing caused or will cause another is therefore to refer
indirectly to what happens in general. But in practice the sort of A,B,C formula
just set out is not easy to discover or to apply to a given sequence of events,
partly because the relation of particular to general varies with the type of process
analysed. In the world of physics we can specify rather precisely what conditions
will lead to what outcomes. Otherwise we could not send a rocket to Jupiter.
Organic matter is less easy to analyse in terms of causal sequences because living
creatures are complex. Members of a species do not react in a uniform way. The
confidence that can be placed in judgements of cause in medicine differs from
that in physics even though the concept of cause remains the same. A doctor may
believe that, given complete knowledge of the relevant conditions, he could
predict exactly the outcome of treating a patient with a certain drug, yet in
practice seldom be able to do so. Patients do not react in the uniform, way in
which rockets do. Medical science of course assumes that the condition from
which a patient is suffering has a determinate cause and that the therapy will
have a determinate effect. But often this does not make it possible either to
diagnose or to treat the condition with confidence. Doctors have to go by
probabilities, based for example on the frequency with which a certain drug is
followed by a cure, even when the details of the process are unknown. It was
reasonable to assume that penicillin attacked streptococcal infection and that
most of the patients suffering from this infection to whom penicillin was given
recovered because of it, long before anyone could show how this happened.
Lawyers need, I think, to bear this in mind when weighing medical evidence that
is couched, as it often has to be, in causal terms. The causes of most diseases lie in
a complex of factors any one of which can be said only to contribute to the
pathology.
If the concept of cause is hard to apply in the organic world of living matter it
is not clear that it applies at all to the way in which human beings decide what to
do. When people decide what to do they have reasons for deciding. But we need
not and often do not think that these reasons would persuade everyone in a
similar situation or that they would persuade the same person on another
occasion. It is not clear that, if we knew all there was to know about the person
who has to decide what to do, we could predict their decision with certainty. The
decision need not be seen as an instance of a general law about the way in which
human beings in general, or that particular person, react. For this reason the law,
which is deeply concerned with human decision and action, often employs
concepts that are only loosely analogous to causal connection in the world of
inorganic or organic matter. The difference between human decision-making and
the material world is marked by speaking of reasons for deciding and acting
rather than causes. Advising someone to invest in a certain stock, even if they
take the advice, is not the same as causing them to invest in it. But there is an
analogy between deciding to act for a certain reason and being subject, as we all
are, to the principles of physics and biology. To be satisfied that a person acted for
a given reason, say that they invested on the advice of their stockbroker, we must
believe that in the mind of the person to whom the stockbroker's advice was
given it was sufficient to induce them to make the investment.2
What values, then, does the concept of causation serve? It presupposes three
features of the external world that help us to survive. It assumes that the world
we live in is within limits objective, regular and knowable. To the extent that this
is true we can understand what happens around us and achieve at least some of
our aims. The external world is conceived as objective in that it exists
independently of us. But it does not follow that the way in which we conceive it
is independent of our make-up and situation. For example, according to the
theory of relativity certain data are relative to the position and motion in space
and time of the subject observing them. Though there is an external world
independent of us, it is plausible to think with Kant that the way we are made,
and with Darwin that our need to survive, structure the way in which we see it.
A second value presupposed by the concept of cause is regularity. We are
aware not merely of an objective world but of one in which patterns repeat
themselves so that when similar conditions are present in different times and
places similar outcomes follow. The universe treats like cases alike. But, as noted,
our access to reliable generalisations is greater in the world of physics than in the
world of living matter. This is not because causal regularities are not present in
the organic world, if we can get at them, but because it is more difficult to get at
them. It is less clear that causal regularities govern human decision-making and
action. We do not and perhaps cannot know if determinism is true. So, even if
causation is a category from which we cannot escape when we analyse the
external world, it does not follow that we have to analyse everything that
happens in terms of cause.
A third value presupposed by the concept of cause is that the way in which
things happen is within limits knowable. Even if we cannot know how things are
in themselves – and Kant thought we could not – we can know them as they
appear to us human beings. That is in practice enough for us to find our way
around and to survive. It does not follow that everything that happens is in
principle knowable and, if known, would be seen as an instance of an objective
and regular sequence of events. The point is worth making because thinkers such
as Newton and Einstein conceived their inquiries into how events happen as an
effort to understand the mind of God. Access to that would, they thought, yield a
set of principles that operate with complete objectivity and regularity. That belief
may or may not be correct. Many scientists think that it is not true at the level of
fundamental particles or cosmology. But it is in any case separate from a belief in
the value of the concept of cause. The value attaching to causation remains even
if some events have no cause and if our makeup is such that we are tempted, by a
sort of evolutionary overkill, to use the concept in unsuitable contexts.
Values Underlying the Concept of Responsibility
Human responsibility links causation and the law. But responsibility is not a
purely legal concept. That people are responsible for their actions and the
outcome of their actions is central to everyday life. We judge ourselves and others
on the basis that we are responsible for what we do and bring about irrespective
of whether what we did was legal. Only in a limited class of cases are we not
only responsible for the harm we bring about but also legally liable for it. But
these cases are common and important enough for causation to feature
prominently in legal argument.3
The mention of "harm" may mislead. We are responsible not only for the bad
things we do and bring about but also for the good things. Being responsible for
good actions and outcomes is important in everyday life but not often in law. We
are, and wish to be seen as, responsible for our successes. But we cannot take
credit for them without also incurring discredit for our failures. Responsibility
cuts both ways.
In ordinary language there is a close link between causation and responsibility
even when natural events are concerned. The Plasmodium parasite was
"responsible" for the patient's malaria. But human responsibility for outcomes is a
narrower notion and rests on different values. It is used to pick out a certain type
of cause, namely the person, if any, whose conduct explains what has happened.
It focuses for example on the person who exposed the patient to the malaria
parasite, rather than on the parasite itself. The outcome, welcome or unwelcome,
is then attributed to that person and they must account for it, as the term
"responsible" implies. So responsibility, and at one remove legal liability, are
concerned with a different type of cause from the causes of disease and cure with
which medicine is concerned, but not with a different concept of causation.
What values underlie the use of the concept of cause to fix responsibility? If
the world is to be a good place to live in we must be alert to the difference people
make to it, for better or worse, by their interventions.4 People change the world.
So do malaria parasites. But malaria parasites cannot be called to account.
Holding people responsible is requiring them to account for the changes they
bring about.
We need the concept of cause to decide what changes a person's conduct has
brought about. For this purpose we compare the world as it is after the person has
intervened with the world as it would have been had they not intervened. To
make the comparison we must know what the person did, the circumstances in
which they did it, and the relevant causal generalisations. These together tell us
what would have happened (or more often what would probably have happened)
if the person concerned had not done what they did. We then know what
changes, if any, the person in question has to account for. If the motorist had
driven at a reasonable speed the pedestrian would (or would not), given distance
and speed of reaction, have been able to cross the road in time to avoid being hit.
If the doctor had not advised against it, the patient would have had the
inoculation and avoided (or not avoided) the disease. Causation is an essential
tool for holding people responsible for the changes they make in the world.
Why should we want to hold people responsible? Responsibility has a
pragmatic value. Holding people responsible for the changes they make
encourages them to change the world for the better and discourages them from
changing it for the worse. To credit people with the good they bring about and
debit them with the harm they do provide incentives to do good and avoid harm.
The consequences of treating people as responsible are likely to be better than if
they were treated as automata.
A second value is, in my view, more basic. If people are made responsible for
their actions and the outcome of their actions they acquire a history of actions,
achievements and failures which are genuinely theirs. This history helps to form
their character and identity. It gives them a sense of themselves and others as
individuals, each unique, because each has done or brought about different
things. So the process by which we come to think of ourselves and others as
distinct, unique people depends indirectly on our grasp of causal generalisations.
Given this, when the patient who has undergone a difficult operation recovers,
the surgeon who operated can be credited with a success. When a burst tyre
causes a road accident this can be attributed to the clumsy way in which the
garage mechanic fixed it. It is his failure, for which discredit attaches to him.
But the use of causal principles in the context of responsibility carries with it a
built-in limit. We are responsible because we have intervened in the world.
Consistently with this idea, what is attributed to us as part of our intervention
extends only to the later events that our intervention explains. It explains the
sequels that happen in the normal course of events but not what happens when
some other person or coincidental event later intervenes in a way that serves to
explain what happens thereafter. The patient's recovery is attributed to the
surgeon's intervention. But if on recovering the ex-patient takes up a successful
career in computing that is not the surgeon's doing, though he made it possible.
The mechanic's clumsiness is responsible for the burst tyre and the accident that
ensues but not for the fact that the owner then decides to buy a more expensive
car. The decision to buy an expensive car, like the decision to take up computing,
begins a new chapter of events that serves to explain what happens afterwards. It
is not conceived as part of the earlier sequence of events, since these do not serve
to explain it, though they provided the opportunity or occasion for the later
decisions to take up computing or buy the expensive car. This idea of a later
intervention (sometimes described in law by the ugly and pretentious but not
inaccurate phrase novus actus interveniens) does not imply any break in the
physical continuity of events. But it does mark a break in the explanatory power
of the earlier cause. It fits in with the idea of a cause as a recipe or explanation.
It also serves to limit human responsibility so that each person can be credited
with achievements and debited with failures that are uniquely their own. If our
responsibility extended to everything that would not have happened had we not
done what we did, we would share responsibility with many other people and the
sense of personal identity that responsibility serves to foster would be eroded. So
to understand how the concept of causation applies to problems of human
responsibility we need to be conscious of the functions that being responsible
fulfils in our lives. Responsibility for outcomes is limited in such a way that it
retains the power to explain events and at the same time fosters our sense of
ourselves and others as individuals.
Values Underlying Limitations on Legal Liability
Law does not punish people or make them pay compensation for all the losses
they inflict or all the harm they do. Often we intervene in the world and cause
loss to others without incurring either legal liability or moral blame. Competitors
in business, love, politics and sport cause loss to and even humiliate their rivals,
but unless the successful competitor resorts to cheating, success is neither illegal
nor immoral. Even when harm is inflicted – and I mean by harm something like
bodily injury which in principle no one should inflict on another except in self-
defence – special legal values must be satisfied before the person responsible for
causing the harm is made subject to sanctions.
Law limits liability for harm caused out of regard for justice in adjudication.
This takes the form on the one hand of corrective justice, which requires the
person who causes harm to another without justification to make the harm good.
On the other hand, it takes the form of procedural justice or fairness to the person
on whom the sanction of punishment or compensation may be imposed. Fairness
suggests that at least three conditions should be met before a person who is said
to have caused harm can be made legally liable for it. The person must have had
notice that if they did so-and-so and thereby caused such-and-such harm they
would be liable to such-and-such a sanction. The sanction must be roughly
proportional to the conduct. And the connection between conduct and harm must
be proved. These values do not apply in quite the same way in criminal and civil
law but they have always to be kept in mind.
These legal values balance regard for the doer with regard for the victim. In
civil law the principle of corrective justice makes the doer morally responsible for
harm caused without justification but leaves open what is due by way of
reparation. To turn the duty to made amends for the harm into a legal duty to
pay money involves a form of state intervention in the victim's favour. It needs to
be balanced by measures to protect the defendant. One measure that fairness
requires is that the defendant should have been able to choose whether to run the
risk of incurring the sanction.
To respect freedom of choice, the Saw should define in advance, at least in
general terms, the type of conduct and outcome that may entail liability and the
sanctions that may be imposed on the person responsible. Hence in law we are
almost never faced, except at a preliminary stage, with the open-ended inquiry
What caused this harm? The question is rather "Did so-and-so's unlawful
conduct5 cause this harm?" Law prescribes what must be shown to have caused
what. If a person causes harm by doing something that the law does not forbid,
or else does something that it forbids but thereby causes harm for which it gives
no remedy, the doer obviously incurs no legal liability. If the doer causes harm
without fault in jurisdiction in which fault is condition of liability, or causes
harm of a sort which is not the subject of compensation (for example, pure
economic loss or psychological trauma in a jurisdiction that does not recognise
these as grounding compensation) there is no recovery at law. Both ends of the
causal chain, conduct and harm, have to satisfy legal criteria.
Fairness also requires that a sanction should not be disproportionate to the
gravity of the conduct for which it is imposed. In civil law this serves to exclude
liability for harm of an unforeseeable type even when caused by the defendant's
wrongful conduct, for example for the result of an explosion when only a
collision was to be feared. That the sanction would be disproportionate to the
gravity of the conduct is a distinct ground for limiting liability. It can justify
refusing compensation even when the harm was caused by the wrongful conduct
and not by a later intervention. This point is sometimes obscured by the use of
the umbrella term "remoteness of damage". To take a familiar example, a motorist
negligently runs someone over. When the victim is taken to hospital, the hospital
is struck by lightning and the victim suffers burns in the resulting fire. The burns
will be regarded as caused by the lightning, a later intervention, rather than the
negligent driving. The motorist's intervention in the world does not explain the
burns though it forms part of the history of how they came about. But if the
motorist runs into the boot of a car that is unexpectedly carrying explosives and
the resultant explosion causes widespread damage, the motorist's negligent
driving undoubtedly caused the widespread damage. But to make the motorist
liable for the explosion might be disproportionate to his fault and hence unfair. In
legal terms it would be damage of an unforeseeable type.
A third value that, law insists on in the interests of fairness to the person
potentially liable is that the unlawful conduct must be proved to have caused the
damage claimed. Here, I think, it is easy for lawyers and physicians to
misunderstand one another. To be fair to the person potentially liable, causal
connection between conduct and harm must be proved according to the
appropriate standard of proof, whether on a balance of probabilities or to a more
rigorous standard. Whatever the standard, there will be cases when, from a
medical point of view, the connection between, say, physical injury and
psychological trauma seems clear but the evidence fails to persuade the judge or
jury because the onus of proof lies on the victim. The Riles about onus of proof in
civil law rest on the view that money should not be transferred from one person
to another without a good reason. It must be fair to the defendant to order money
compensation. Hence there are injuries that go uncompensated not because
lawyers and doctors have differing conceptions of causation but because in
treating patients doctors, even if they are practising "evidence based medicine",
often have to act on probabilities that fall short of the standard of proof required
by courts.
There is also the point noted earlier, that causal generalisations are more
difficult to establish for organic biological, processes than for inorganic ones.
Thus "the pathogenesis of PTSD (post-traumatic-stress disorder) and a number of
other affective disorders still remains to be solved".6 This problem might be
alleviated by altering the rules about proving causal connection. Sometimes there
is a statistical correlation between trauma type A and trauma type B (say a
physical injury and psychological sequel), but causal connection between them is
not established, because we do not know the stages, if any, by which one leads to
the other. If that is so, the law could perhaps retain the need to prove causal
connection, but put on the person alleged to have caused trauma B the burden,
once trauma A is established, of producing evidence to show that B was not
caused by A. If it is desirable to extend compensation in this way – and to my
mind the theory of compensation needs rethinking – it would be better to change
the rules of proof in this way rather than to create a cause of action for exposing
another to a statistical risk of injury of a given type, such as trauma type B. It is
important to keep the law aligned as far as possible with the values that prevail in
everyday life, and to insist on proof of causal connection is one way of doing this.
Conclusion
In the upshot, this brief survey leads to, the conclusion that causation,
responsibility and adjudication all embody different values that have a bearing
on the extent to which a person who has caused harm to another should be made
liable in law to pay compensation. There is no single key to the solution of the
complex problems involved, no guiding star. As in many areas of life, values
conflict, and the law must try to adjust the conflicts so as to promote, to the
limited extent that it can, a harmonious and stable society.
* Fellow of the British Academy, Formerly Regius Professor of Civil Law, Fellow and Acting Warden of
All Souls College, Fellow of Queen's College and Fellow of New College, Oxford.
1 In favour of sufficiency, see T Honoré, "Necessary and Sufficient Conditions in Tort Law", in DG Owen
(ed), Philosophical Foundations of Tort Law, Oxford, 1995, pp363-85.
2 Honoré, above n1, pp380-4.
3 In insurance law and some other contexts responsibility for harm caused by events such as riot, war
and shipwreck is in issue.
4 Also with the changes they have failed to bring about by not intervening in the world when they were
called on to do so.
5 Or some person or thing for whom he is vicariously responsible or some thing for which he is strictly
liable.
6 D Mendelson, The Interfaces of Medicine and Law: The History of the Liability for Negligently Caused
Psychiatric Injury (Nervous Shock), Dartmouth, Ashgate, 1998, p288.