2 Scientific and Legal Approaches to
Causation
JANE STAPLETON*
Introduction
I should like to make a provocative claim. Causation is not a concept at all.
Causation is simply a term we sometimes use to answer one question about some
transition that has happened in the world, and sometimes to answer a quite
different question about such a transition.
When we think about some transition that has happened in the world, there
are two questions we might ask.1 These two inquiries are:
First, how did the transition come about ... this is a factual question about
history, though there may be value choices about how we should frame
this history question, as I will explain later.
The second question is, of all the myriad of factors that we know came
together to produce that transition, which ones seem, in our individual
opinions, to be important for the particular purpose we have at hand.
Clearly our answer to the second inquiry will vary according to what it
was we perceived our purpose to be in asking the question and the
perspective on that purpose each of us individually took in the light of our
experience and common sense.
When we come to express our answers to these two questions, we might well
happen to use causal language, although in both we might alternatively choose
non-causal language.2 When causation is being discussed among lawyers and
scientists, a basic source of difficulty they have in understanding one another is
that, when scientists use causal language they are always pursuing facts, whether
this is in the shape of the exhaustive historical inquiry or in the shape of a more
focused inquiry. If a scientist knows all the facts of how a transition came about,
he or she would not consider that there was any room for a dispute labelled as
one about the "causation" of the transition. In contrast, when lawyers use causal
language, they sometimes are applying it to cases where the parties agree about
all the facts, but have nevertheless framed their dispute as one about "causation".
The Scientist
Let me explain. Imagine a scientist is investigating why a wheat crop
unexpectedly fell over before the time for harvest. In the context of the
exhaustive first, historical, inquiry about how the transition came about, gravity
must be included as a factor in the answer; and the scientist may choose to
express this in terms of gravity being one of the "causes" of the crop falling over.
Though the scientist always has in mind this exhaustive, indeed infinitely long,
list of factors which would satisfy this inquiry, in the real world scientists must
narrow their inquiries to the practically manageable. They do this by focusing on
a particular, usually very specific, hypothesis: for example, was the absence of
rainfall in the preceding month a relevant factor in explaining the fall of the
crop? That scientific inquiry is narrowed in this way to provide a short cut to
practical knowledge does not mean that it is not concerned with the discovery of
facts, or is inevitably riddled with bias and opinion. The validity of the scientific
results of such a narrowed study are preserved by the strictures of scientific
method which requires the assiduous and clear acknowledgment of the purpose
and assumptions of the study (the specification of its narrow limits), and the
specification of the hypothesis that it is testing.
It is important to realise how labile and shifting can be one person's use of
causal language. Take our wheat scientist: she may well use causal language in
answering the exhaustive historical, inquiry about how the transition came about
and say gravity was a "cause" of the crop fall, and yet in the more focused
purposive inquiry of whether the absence of rainfall had made a relevant
explanatory difference she might dismiss gravity as not being a "cause" because
relative to the hypothetical world she will have explicitly or implicitly specified,
namely one in which a wheat crop does not fall over, the factor of gravity has not
varied. Clearly, our scientist means quite different things by the same word,
"cause", in the two contexts. In the focused context her causal usage is different,
not because she has forgotten that gravity is part of the factual history of how the
fall of the crop came about, but because she has used scientific method to
structure her inquiry, confining her explicit analysis to factors which are
potential variables relative to the implicitly assumed alternative universe, only
against which a transition appears to be a transition.
The wheat crop example not only confirms the labile nature of causal usage,
but it also illustrates a number of important points about scientific inquiry. First,
it is always directed at the discovery of facts and facts alone, Ideally, a desire or
"bias" for a particular answer to the inquiry should be absent. Ideal scientific
method requires that any choices made by the scientist, for example in the
specification of the alternative world against which the question of explanatory
relevance is asked, must be disclosed. Secondly, a scientist has no difficulty, as
some philosophers seem to have, in identifying an absence or omission of a factor
as being part of the history of the transition. Indeed, a great deal of experimental
method employs a comparison of simple differences between systems, in one of
which a factor is present and in the other the system is identical save for the
absence of that factor.
Yet a third feature of scientific inquiry may be illustrated by an extension of
the wheat crop example. There may be an alternative hypothesis of practical
relevance about the history of the fallen wheat. Perhaps in the preceding month
not only was there an absence of rainfall but also a rare series of severe frosts.
The scientist's aim will be to determine, by suitably controlled experiments,
whether either factor (drought; frosts) was alone capable of producing the effect
observed. She will consider all possibilities: that neither was capable of producing
the effect alone and that only in combination were the factors capable of
producing the effect; or that each alone would have been sufficient. This latter
possibility produces a phenomenon, sometimes described by lawyers as "multiple
sufficient causation" and by philosophers as "over-determination": the crop has
fallen over after the operation of two factors either of which without the other
would have been sufficient to produce the effect. Importantly, the scientist is in
no way troubled by this possibility: if the experiments show it to be the case, then
the factual history of the crop fall is understood: the scientist would not consider
there was any room thereafter for a dispute labelled as one about the "causation"
of the transition.
When scientists disagree in the course of such inquiries, they are disagreeing
about the experimental design or theoretical techniques (such as the appropriate
statistical method) by which facts are discovered or deduced, how to eliminate
bias and so on: it is worth emphasising that scientists simply do not have
disagreements about what this word "causation" means, or the role the but-for
idea should play as a so-called "causal test": causal theory does no work for them.
Of course, as Dr Greenberg explains in his chapter, scientists often have to deal
with the problem of gaps in knowledge. But the processes they study are the
consequence of natural laws. As he succinctly puts it: here "teleological notions
are irrelevant".
The Lawyer
Lawyers also use causal language in different contexts and it therefore also has a
shifting meaning in their mouths. In some cases, lawyers are concerned with the
first, historical, question: for example, was the heart seizure the result of the drug
the patient ingested? Was it part of the history of that seizure? Though the
context here concerns a fact, the difficult problem for the law is not a question of
fact in the sense the scientist, or indeed the citizen, would understand it. The task
of weighing evidence, judgment, is not itself conceptually problematic. What
really confronts the law as a critical problem in cases of this kind is the legal
policy question of how to proceed when the evidence about the facts of past
transitions is patchy. Courts cannot order experiments to fill evidentiary gaps. At
most they can take expert evidence. Yet if there had been agreement between
experts there would be no legal dispute on the issue. This means that the first,
historical, inquiry is only presented to a court when there is a dispute between
witnesses, some testifying that the relevant factor, let us say the defendant's
breach of obligation, was a part of the history of the plaintiff's condition (ie that
aspect of it of which she is complaining) and some testifying that it was not. The
problem here is that, as we will see, appellate courts need to choose rules about
how to resolve these disputes arising from evidentiary gaps, what should be
required of the plaintiff in order to prove her case and so on. Ideally these choices
will be guided by the overall purpose of the law in these contexts, namely the
allocation of legal responsibility. Specifically, they should be guided by what the
court perceives to be moral and policy goals of the particular rule of obligation.
But it is also true that in many of the contexts where lawyers use causal terms,
they are in fact dealing with the second, purposive, inquiry (namely, which of the
factors that, it is agreed, brought about the transition seem important in the
context of a legal dispute about responsibility) and are asking it for the purpose of
how legal responsibility should be allocated in the context of a legal dispute.3
Where, as in law, the purpose at hand is the moral or policy evaluation of human
conduct, this second inquiry can never be reduced to a question of fact. Indeed, it
is only reached after the facts have been agreed or decided. This is why it is so
misleading when lawyers couch disputes about the answer to the second inquiry
in causal language and why courts mystify ordinary people when they describe
the dispute as a question of fact. The distinction between the historical inquiry
and the purposive legal inquiry is implicit in a well-known dictum of Lord Reid:
The question [of legal causation] must be determined by applying common sense to the facts of each
particular case. One may find that as a matter of history several people have been at fault and that if any
one of them had acted properly the accident would not have happened, but that does not mean that the
accident must be regarded as having been caused by the faults of all of them. One must discriminate
between those faults which must be discarded as being too remote and those which must not.4
Earlier I argued that in cases formally concerned with whether the breach of
obligation by the defendant had anything to do with the history by which the
plaintiff's misfortune came about, the critical problem for the law is not a
question of fact even though the context concerns a fact. It is the legal policy
question of which rules to choose when confronting evidentiary gaps. I have now
argued that where the legal dispute arises from agreed facts and concerns the
weight to put on a particular historically relevant factor in allocating legal
responsibility, courts must also use the moral and policy goals of the particular
rule of obligation to resolve the issue. The important conclusion from this is that
in both contexts in which disputes might be presented to appellate courts in
causal language, the critical task of the court is to choose which legal rule best
fits the perceived goals of the law. In both contexts it is bizarre and highly
misleading to the average citizen for the court to assert they are confronting
questions of fact. In this important sense, appellate problems of "causation in law"
are not questions of fact.
The Double Hunters’ Illustration: March v Stramare
A startling example of the different goals pursued by lawyers and scientists is
their reaction to what I will call the "double hunters' case". Here two hunters
carelessly shoot into a wood, both bullets hitting a beater who dies, the medical
evidence being clear that either shot would have been sufficient to kill the beater:
in philosopher's jargon, the death was "over-determined". Scientists see no
difficulty in this case because it is quite clear how the death came about. If forced
to give an answer to the exhaustive first question, the scientist will include the
decision of the great grandmother of Hunter No 1 to have children because that is
certainly a factor in the prior history of the death of the beater. If asked the more
focused explanatory question of what made a difference here, relative to the
normal experience of human society (a qualification scientific method would
require to be made clear), the scientist would be able to select the unusual
features of both hunters' negligence. Relative to the observed manners of human
society, this was unusual, a variable.
But lawyers regard the case as very problematic: some arguing that each
hunter would be able to deny he was a "cause" because "but for" his act the death
would still have occurred. Others argue that the law should not apply the "but
for" "test of causation" but a different "test", known as the NESS test (the
"necessary element in a sufficient set" test first formulated by Hart and Honoré),
which compares the prospects of the victim to a world where the other hunter
did not behave carelessly.5 The NESS approach is the correct one for determining
whether a factor played a role in the history of the outcome,6 so the dispute here
is not about what happened, but about the appropriate approach to the second,
purposive, inquiry. That is when and why, in a context where the relevant
purpose is the allocation of legal responsibility, the law should hold a defendant
responsible for a transition that would have happened anyway.7 The confusing
thing is that under our unfortunate current structures of legal rhetoric this
dispute is typically paraded as one about the correct causal "tests" to apply to the
agreed facts, rather than a direct investigation of the opposing arguments about
responsibility and about legal policy.
Exactly the same divergence of approach can be seen in responses to the facts
of March v Stramare (E & MH) Pty Ltd,8 one of the leading High Court
authorities on causation in law. Here a drunk driver had been injured when at
night his speeding car hit a truck that had been parked (by an employee of the
defendant) straddling the centre line of a 6-lane road with its hazard lights on.
The scientist has no problem with this case: it is clear how the injury came about
and no past facts are in dispute. But there was a legal dispute. In the case this
was, unfortunately, framed in causal language: here the litigants described the
issue as whether the plaintiff-driver's conduct was something called a "novus
actus interveniens": and whether it broke something called the "chain of
causation". But, again, this is an unfortunate configuration for legal reasoning to
adopt because it tends to mask the real nature of the dispute: which is one about
competing values and policies concerning what responsibilities citizens should be
held to owe one another in relation to their control of vehicles.
Instead of discussing this slippery non-concept called "causation", I am going to
go back to discuss the two types of inquiry that can be made about a transition in
the world and give examples of how medico-legal disputes can arise within them.
In so doing I want first to make brief comments about how lawyers and scientists
might better make themselves understood to one another.
Advice to the Two Professions
As I have just been suggesting, courts would make themselves clearer to scientists
and other citizens if they explicitly distinguished between these two types of
inquiry: historical involvement; and purposive relevance. In particular, when
courts are presented with cases where the substance of the dispute is about the
rules governing how to fill evidentiary gaps in relation to past facts, or where the
substance of the dispute is about the weight to put on agreed facts, courts should
openly recognise the case is really about competing views of legal responsibility.
Courts should refuse to accept a formulation of the dispute as one about
"causation" and so-called "causal tests", but instead insist that the parties argue
directly and in non-causal terms about the issues of policy and principle relevant
to the question of responsibility.
For their part scientists should remember that judges face three major
constraints. First, a court must reach a clear decision in a case and do so within a
tight time frame. A court does not have the option of waiting and seeing, or of
delivering a merely interim opinion. Where there are gaps in our knowledge of
the world, including both gaps in our knowledge of past events as well as gaps in
our knowledge about what would have happened in a hypothetical situation, the
court must form a final view. In a sense it must make an informed guess. The
court cannot postpone its decision until the results of conclusive empirical
research become available, if ever. Clearly, in many cases medical practitioners
are constrained in similar ways.
Secondly, since judgments of appellate courts constitute binding or persuasive
precedents for future courts they should enunciate clearly the principles and
policies that have guided those guesses. This is why a judgment in favour of one
side of a legal dispute cannot convincingly turn on mere assertions that it is a
pragmatic matter of "common sense". This approach manages to be both
patronising and mystifying to ordinary people because it suggests that if the
decision goes against what the particular observing citizen believes is fair this is
because he or she is too obtuse to grasp what lawyers like the judge can see as
pragmatic common sense.
Thirdly, the scientist should remember that the law must itself construct a firm
framework within which legal findings are finally determined: for example, it
must construct a rule relating to the appropriate burden of proof in a case,
whether the actionable damage can be constituted by the loss of a chance, rules
for assessment of damages and so on.
The First Historical Inquiry: Did this Factor Play a
Role in the History of this Outcome?
Evidentiary gaps concerning past facts: McGhee’s case
The first set of problems that can arise here is that it may not be clear what
happened. This can be illustrated by what I will call the "single hunter's problem".
This is like our earlier "double hunters' case", but now only one of the two bullets
hits the beater and there is no evidence to tell from which hunter's gun that bullet
came. Exactly such cases have been presented to appellate courts in North
America9 and parallel cases have also arisen elsewhere.
The classic example of these latter cases is a case presented to the House of
Lords in 1973 called McGhee v National Coal Board.10 Here the victim contracted
dermatitis after two types of exposure to brick dust: exposure during work; and
exposure after work as he travelled home caked with the dust of the day on his
skin. It was only in relation to the second period of exposure, that is on the way
home, that a legal complaint was pursued against the employer.
The medical evidence was clear that exposure to brick dust seemed to increase
the probability of dermatitis. So in this case each period of exposure, the period at
work and the period as the victim travelled home, could be said to have
materially increased the probability of the dermatitis. Now, in an appropriate
case, the law has no objection to a fact being proved merely by statistics based on
the level of exposure to risk. If we know that a particular surgical error
quadruples the risk of post-operative cardiac arrest, and a patient suffers that
error and then post-operative arrest it may well be that the court will accept the
statistic as evidence that the arrest was due to the error. Indeed, it may be held
that the assessment of the level of material contribution to risk may need be no
more precise than that it "more than doubled" the existing risk: for this is
evidence that can go to establish that, on the balance of probabilities, the
misfortune was more likely than not due to that source of added risk.
Moreover, courts are prepared to be quite rough and ready about these things.
For example, in a case where it is known that the misfortune occurs through an
instance of infection and that the risk of infection during two exposures is at the
same level of intensity, courts may well be willing to take a temporal approach
and regard the fact that the longer period of exposure was that due to the
defendant's breach of obligation as evidence towards showing that, on the
balance of probabilities, the infection occurred during that period. Of course, the
temporal approach is also the rough and ready way courts handle medical
conditions that are known to be cumulative in the sense that it is known that
every exposure to the source of harm precipitates some deterioration in the
condition. Thus, in the landmark industrial disease case of Thompson v Smiths
Shiprepairers (North Shields) Ltd11 each exposure of the employee to industrial
noise was known to have increased his deafness: the court was then prepared to
use the length of employment with the various employers to apportion between
them legal responsibility for the total level of deafness presented by the employee
at trial. The case is also illuminating for its illustration of the legal principle that
to succeed in establishing liability against a particular defendant the plaintiff
need not show that his entire condition was the result of that defendant's breach:
it is sufficient if he can establish that the breach "contributed" to that total
condition. Indeed it is a much better illustration of this principle than the case
usually cited for it: Bonnington Castings Ltd v Wardlaw,12 a problematic
precedent because, although the medical condition there was the result of a
cumulative mechanism, apportionment was not discussed or applied, leaving the
defendant liable to pay for a loss which had not been produced by his breach of
obligation (that due to those periods of exposure not due to his breach).
McGhee's case was, however, different from these cases because here not only
could the medical experts not put a figure on the level of contribution to risk
presented by the period of exposure due to the defendant's breach, they could not
even say whether or not it was more likely to have operated to produce the
dermatitis than the other source of risk The reason for this major evidentiary gap
was that the aetiology of this particular form of dermatitis was simply not
known. As we have seen, had there been evidence that the biological relation of
exposure to condition had been cumulative (as it is for deafness) the law might
have been willing simply to apportion between the two periods of exposure on
the basis of their length: holding the employer liable only for that proportion of
the total condition corresponding to the proportion that the period after work
was of the total exposure time. But, as the Law Lords implicitly accepted, the
evidence did not allow them to assume a cumulative mechanism.14 This was
because the mechanism might just as easily have been a "trigger" type of
mechanism akin to the "isolated incident of infection" mechanism. If this had
been the case and the level of risk of triggering rose exponentially over time so
that, say, a 20 minute exposure at the end of a 8 hour exposure created more risk
than the entire first 8 hours, the pursuer (for McGhee's case was an appeal from a
Scottish decision) might have been able to win and recover damages for his entire
condition using orthodox legal ideas. This is because the evidence of contribution
to risk might have showed that the risk posed by the period of exposure at work
was less than the risk posed by the period of exposure as the employee cycled
home, even though the latter was very considerably shorter in time. But the
evidence did not point to a trigger mechanism any more than it pointed to a
cumulative mechanism.
What the Law Lords did with the problem in McGhee's case was to allow the
pursuer to leap what they recognised was an "evidentiary gap". The technical
argument for the workman was that: since he could prove that the fault of the
employer (in not providing showers after work) had materially increased the risk
of dermatitis, this material increase in risk should, in the circumstances, be
accepted by the law as sufficient to establish a material contribution to the
dermatitis from which he suffered. As we have seen, a material increase in risk
may well be enough to be accepted by the law as establishing the appropriate
historical connection if there is simply enough evidence to show that it adds more
than the existing risk. What was so extraordinary here was that the pursuer could
not even show this crude relation. Yet the Law Lords chose to allow the pursuer's
argument. Moreover, they allowed him to recover damages for his total condition,
a result that is a radical departure from orthodoxy, and would have been so even
if the pursuer had been able to establish a cumulative mechanism.15
One might be tempted to dismiss McGhee as a peculiar case that should be
confined tc its facts. Certainly that is what a later generation of Law Lords tried,
unsuccessfully, to do in a medical negligence case called Wilsher v Essex Area
Health Authority.16 But in terms of practice and litigation, the decision in
McGhee's case has proved to be exceptionally important. It has, for example,
come to haunt much of the asbestos litigation in Australia where an influential
dictum of Dixon J has been thought, mistakenly in my view, to give it added
importance.17 Even more strikingly, it was critical to the success, in 1998, of the
largest personal injury claim in British history, a case concerning ex-miners
suffering from a range of chest illnesses linked to exposure to coal dust other than
pneumoconiosis (eg bronchitis, asthma, emphysema and small airways disease).18
The success of these cases depended on the trial judge agreeing to apply the
approach to medical evidence approved by the Lords in McGhee's case. For
political reasons – Tony Blair described the compensation settlement as "a debt
we all owe to the ex-pitmen"19 – that trial decision was not appealed. As a result,
in 1999 a record settlement was agreed for the benefit of 100,000 ex-pitmen of £2
billion. This sum, payable by the taxpayer, is more than the sum the Conservative
Government had received from the privatisation and associated asset sales of the
coal industry.20 So, at least in terms of socio-economic impact, McGhee must now
be recognised as one of the most important post-war decisions of the common
law.
In the context of this chapter, the point to emphasise about McGhee is that the
Law Lords were faced with an issue they could not postpone until science had
discovered the mechanism of dermatitis. Moreover, though the central issue arose
from the first, historical, inquiry that can be made about a transition to an
outcome, the real issue for the Lords was not what had or had not happened in
the past in the sense that a scientist would be interested. It was about what rules
the law should select to deal with evidentiary gaps concerning what happened in
the past. What moral ideas and what legal policies should guide those choices
was the question before that tribunal. Only when non-lawyers understand this
will the ruling in the case be intelligible to them. And only when courts openly
face and assess the moral and policy disputes at the heart of McGhee will they
begin to construct coherent boundaries for its use in the future.21
Loss of a Chance: Redefining the “Damage” forming
the “Gist” of the Action
The dilemma for the Law Lords in McGhee arose from the difficulty of knowing
what physical processes occurred in the past. Another example of this
phenomenon is Hotson v East Berks Area Health Authority,22 a so-called pure loss
of a chance case, where the plaintiff formulated his complaint in terms of the
chance of avoiding an outcome. In this classic example a boy fell from a tree and
suffered a particular injury to his hip. The medical evidence was that of people
injured in that way 75 per cent would suffer necrosis. The boy went to hospital
but was treated in such a careless way that even had he not been one of these
doomed people he would have suffered the necrosis complication. Now, if the boy
had formulated his legal complaint of "damage" in terms of the necrosis he would
have lost. The law would have applied its traditional but-for test and the critical
fiction associated with it in this context: namely the law would have asked but
for the hospital's negligence would the boy have suffered the necrosis. This
question is evaluated as things stood just before the boy reaches hospital. Now at
that time, of 100 boys in his position 75 were doomed and 25 were not. But we
will never know, certainly not in the time-scale of the litigation, whether our
plaintiff was one of the doomed or one of the not doomed. So the law resorts to a
fiction based on the statistics of groups: and because it is more likely he was one
of the doomed, the law then adopts the fiction that he was doomed: hence the
hospital's conduct is treated as having had no effect on him.
The plaintiff can avoid this dead-end if he formulates his complaint in terms of
the "damage" of a loss of a chance (to avoid the necrosis) and persuades the court
to adopt a competing fiction: under this fiction every boy arriving at the hospital
has a 25 per cent chance of avoiding necrosis. Since this boy contracted necrosis,
it is clear that the hospital took away that chance and thus the boy is treated as
having suffered the injury of "the loss of his chance of avoiding the necrosis". If
the plaintiff is allowed to reformulate the "actionable damage", or as I have called
it elsewhere the "gist damage",23 in this way he will then be able to reformulate
the historical inquiry (which depends on that formulation) into one which he can
easily satisfy: was the defendant's fault part of the history by which the plaintiff
lost the chance of avoiding necrosis?
The dilemma underlying the debate about the loss of a chance argument is
again an example of the wider phenomenon I have been discussing: the law
having to choose which rules are appropriate where there are evidentiary gaps as
to what happened in a case. The choice is not about causal theories but about
what policies might be thought to justify expanding the way legal complaints can
be formulated, what can form the subject-matter of complaint: can it extend to a
"pure" loss of a chance. It is worth noting that in Hotson's case the Court of
Appeal embraced the fiction underlying the loss of a chance reformulation of the
gist damage while the House of Lords, in an unsatisfactorily reasoned set of
speeches, seemed to prefer the fiction underlying the traditional formulation of
actionable damage.
How to Define History? Choice of Parallel Worlds
The problems in McGhee and Hotson arose from the gaps in our knowledge of
what physical processes occurred in the past when the evidence of those
processes is sketchy. But there is an even more difficult aspect to our historical
inquiry of how a transition came about and what factors were and were not
involved. This is that the inquiry can only be made in relation to some fictional
world.24 Yet there may be more than one parallel world we can envisage and so
the question becomes: relative to which parallel universe should our questions of
history be framed?
For the physical scientist trying to establish whether a factor was part of the
history of an outcome, this problem of the parallel universe against which the
history question is asked is ameliorated by the ability to run multiple experiments
and draw on known physical relations. As noted earlier, it is also ameliorated by
the very nature of scientific method, which requires that the scientist state
implicitly or explicitly the assumptions of the study. These define and confine the
history question internally to those parameters.25
But consider the difficulties that may confront judges. The law is centrally
concerned with human behaviour and often needs to make a decision about
whether a piece of human conduct was part of the history of an outcome about
which the plaintiff is complaining. But in the legal context there are many
potential near-parallel worlds that could be used when it comes to human
behaviour because there are many potential shapes26 the court could give to the
relevant obligation in issue. Typically, because there is disagreement between the
two parties before the court about the shape of the obligation, there is no
agreement about which near-parallel world should be used to determine whether
the conduct of the defendant was part of the history of the injury of the victim.
Logically, the dispute about the shape of the obligation must be resolved before
the historical issue can be addressed because until then the relevant hypothetical
cannot be crystallised.
Moreover, even once the court has chosen the shape of the obligation and
therefore which parallel world it is appropriate to envisage, it may not be clear
what would have happened there. Specifically, it may not be clear what a
particular individual would have done in certain circumstances. The court never
has the option of ordering an experiment modelled on the hypothetical world. At
best it is going to make a guess based on evidence, often evidence relating to
hypothetical human behaviour that a scientist would regard as very weak or
speculative.
(i) Harness case
Say on one particular occasion an employer carelessly fails to provide a safety
harness that would have saved a workman from tumbling to his death.27 The
estate of the victim might well be able to establish that the employer was in
breach of a duty of care in not providing the harness. But unless it can also
establish that this failure was part of the history of the death of the victim the
claim will fail. Now say that the workman was well known not to have used the
harness on those occasions when the employer had actually provided it. The
defendant will urge the court that the appropriate alternative universe to use
when asking if the defendant's omission of the harness was a part of the history
of the death is simply these other occasions when the harness was provided but
not used by the workman. If the court confines the shape of the employer's
obligation to the provision of the harness it will use this hypothetical and the
estate will lose because, even if the defendant had not failed to provide a harness,
the victim would have died anyway.
But this is not the only available near-parallel universe that might be used. As I
have noted, logically we do not get to this question until we decide what the
shape of the defendant's obligation was and there are many choices here. The
estate might urge the court to construct the obligation on employers to include
not only the provision of harnesses but vigorous surveillance to ensure that they
were used. If the court chooses to impose an obligation of this shape, the estate
has a much greater chance of showing that the employer's conduct was part of
the history of the death because now the alternative universe in play is one
where the employer not only provided harnesses but also was assiduous about
the workers using them.
What these cases show is that a court often faces a choice of the context in
which it asks the first, historical, inquiry of whether the defendant was part of
the history of the victim's misfortune, and that this choice arises directly from the
antecedent choices the court has in moulding the shape of the defendant's
obligation. His Honour Keith Mason discussed this inter-relationship28 and it is
one that Lord Hoffman has touched on in a series of recent judgments.29 It is also
a central issue in the palliative medicine and euthanasia contexts, a point
confirmed by Professor Ashby.30
(ii) Failure to warn cases
Sometimes a legal dispute arises not because there is any dispute about the shape
of the obligation but because there is a dispute about what limits the law should
put on the extent of liability for the consequences of breach of that obligation. It
is a bizarre feature of traditional legal rhetoric that this dispute about
responsibility and policy can be concealed by being presented to the court as a
matter concerning which near-parallel universe to use to decide if the breach of
the defendant was part of the history of the injury.
Let me illustrate this with two failure to warn cases from the Canadian
Supreme Court. In Dow Corning Corp v Hollis,31 a claim against a product
manufacturer, the majority held that the plaintiff needed only to show that, had
the defendant warned her, she herself probably would not have used the product.
In other words, the hypothetical used to address the historical inquiry was the
subjective hypothetical of what this specific plaintiff would have done if warned.
She did not have to show that a reasonable person receiving the warning would
have declined the product. However, in Arndt v Smith,32 a claim against a
physician, the majority adopted a more demanding test33 for the historical
hypothetical: namely, the plaintiff must show that a reasonable person, albeit one
sharing the reasonable beliefs, fears, desires and expectations of the patient,
would not have agreed to the medical procedure.34
Now my point about these contrasting cases is that, although the Supreme
Court described what they were doing as setting the appropriate "test of
causation" in failure to warn situations, that terminology obscures what was
really going on. What was really going on was a competition between different
conceptions of responsibility and the different extent of liability for consequences
these conceptions produce. The rule in Arndt truncates the liability of the
physician for losses that were precipitated by the defendant-physician's breach of
obligation more narrowly than the rule in Hollis truncates the liability of
manufacturers. Under Hollis it was regarded as appropriate that the scope of
liability for breach extended to include losses that would not have happened had
the plaintiff been given the warning. Thus, if even if the psychological response
of the plaintiff was so unreasonable that no one else would have declined the
product on receiving the warning, if she would have declined use and thereby
avoided the loss that loss fell with the extent of the Hollis obligation. In contrast,
the Arndt obligation was held to extend only to those losses which would have
been avoided by someone sharing the reasonable beliefs, fears, desires and
expectations of the plaintiff. My point is that these are not disputes about matters
of past fact or evidence. In both cases the failure to warn played a role in the
history of the outcome suffered by the particular plaintiff. They are disputes
about responsibility and policy. In other words, they are disputes about the
second, purposive, inquiry: namely whether the loss to the plaintiff (in the history
of which the defendant's tortious conduct played a role) should be held to be
within the appropriate scope of liability for consequences of the tortious conduct.
Causal language is simply not the appropriate vehicle for these determinations
because it may suggest the dispute is one of objective fact when it clearly is not,
as these two contrasting decisions illustrate.
The Second Inquiry: Is this Historical Factor Relevant
to our Purpose?
Novus actus cases
The same problem arises when courts use casual language to address other types
of dispute where the facts are agreed. This is because they are all really disputes
about what answer the law should give to the second inquiry: about which
factors making up the history of an injury should be regarded by the law as being
relevant in terms of this type of legal responsibility. A very common form of this
responsibility question is whether an intervening event provides a reason for
truncating the responsibility of a defendant.
For example take cases where: a defendant carelessly breaks the plaintiff's leg
but:
on the way to hospital in an ambulance the victim is struck by lightning
and killed; or
at hospital a careless doctor maltreats the leg, necessitating amputation;
or
the victim has a rare allergy to some part of the medicinal treatment and
dies; or
the victim refuses a blood transfusion and dies; or
the victim later becomes depressed by the accident and commits suicide
or murder or rape.
Here, as in the double hunters' case and March v Stramare (E & MH) Pty Ltd,
there is no dispute about the facts or about the history of what happened. The
dispute is about the answer to our second purposive inquiry and our purpose is
allocating legal responsibility. To couch the dispute in any of these cases as being
about whether the intervening event was or was not a novus actus simply tends
to mask the real issue here: an issue about what limits the law should choose to
place on the scope of the legal responsibility of the defendant and why it should
do so.35 Lord Steyn succinctly emphasised this point in the recent "unwanted
baby" case of Macfarlane v Tayside Health Board, where the facts would have
allowed the argument, made in earlier parallel cases in other jurisdictions, that
the decision of the parents to proceed with the unwanted pregnancy had been a
novus actus breaking some "chain of causation":
My Lords, to explain decisions denying a remedy for the cost of bringing up an unwanted child by
saying that there is ... no causative link ... is to resort to unrealistic and formalistic propositions which
mask the real reasons for the decisions. And judges ought to strive to give the real reasons for their
decision.36
Chappel v Hart
Finally, let me turn to two troublesome features of Australian High Court
jurisprudence in this area. In March v Stramare (E & MH) Pty Ltd Mason CJ said
this:
A factor, which secures the presence of the plaintiff at the place where and at the time when he or she is
injured, is not causally connected with the injury, unless the risk of the accident occurring at that time
was greater.37
With respect, the problem with this statement is that, by being couched in
causal language it gives a misleading impression of the role that the concept of
"risk" plays in our understanding of the world.38 We use the concept of risk as a
way of dealing with lack of information. If, after an event, we understand exactly
how it came about and all the factors relevant to its history, there is no role for
the idea of risk when we are asking the historical question of what happened. Put
crudely, once such an injury has happened we know for certain that "a factor,
which secured the presence of the plaintiff at the place where and at the time
when he was injured" was indeed part of the history of how the injury came
about. Far from the relation between that factor and the outcome being one of
risk, we now know the relation to have been one of certainty:39 because given
that we now know all the other factors were going to be present, we can see that
the existence of the factor in question had in fact doomed the person to suffer the
injury.
But while risk plays no role in the historical inquiry in such a case, it often
plays a critical role in the second inquiry about relevance to our legal purpose.
This is because when we ask what factors were important in our dispute about
legal responsibility we often tend to think that it is relevant to know whether the
defendant could foresee that what he or she was doing was increasing the
apparent risks the plaintiff faced. This is very neatly illustrated by an example
given by Mahoney JA in Alexander v Cambridge Credit Corp Ltd:
If a defendant promises to direct me where I should go and, at a crossroads, directs me to the left road
rather than the right road, what happens to me on the left road is, in a sense, the result of what the
defendant has done ... But ... if, being on the left road, I slip and fall, the fact alone that it was the
defendant's direction, in breach of (his obligation), which put me there will not, without more, make the
defendant liable for my broken leg. I say "without more": if ... the left road was known to be dangerous
[the defendant] may be liable.40
In other words, it is relevant to the responsibility issue to ask whether the
defendant could reasonably foresee that he was exposing me to an increased risk
relative to that which I would otherwise face. If there had been no such
foreseeability then, on our current moral views about fault-based responsibility,
the defendant would not be held responsible.
In the context of our discussions about "medical causation" this scenario is
very important because it is very like that in the recent High Court case of
Chappel v Hart.41 Let me simplify the facts of that case to these: a patient suffers
from a progressive throat condition which will sooner or later require an
operation which, no matter how carefully performed, carries a slight but
foreseeable risk of permanent damage to the vocal cords. The defendant does not
warn of the risk, and though he performs the surgery carefully the vocal cords
are damaged.
There is no question here of how the injury occurred and that the defendant's
failure to warn was part of that history because the evidence was that had she
been warned Mrs Hart would have gone to a different surgeon at a different time
and so on. The dispute relates only to the second, purposive, inquiry: was that
failure to warn relevant to the type of legal responsibility in question. It is critical
to observe that, like the person giving me directions in the Justice Mahoney
example, Dr Chappel had no reason to foresee that the injury would actually
happen when he operated. As far as he or anyone knew, or could have known,
the woman needed the operation at some time and so long as the operation was
carried out carefully there would be no greater risk to the vocal cords if Dr
Chappel operated rather than another doctor. Dr Chappel did not foresee and
could not reasonably have foreseen that his failure to warn might expose the
women to any greater risk than she would have faced anyway.
A 3:2 majority of the High Court found the doctor liable to compensate the
woman for the damage to the vocal cords. In the context of this book, I want to
make only a short comment about the case. It is that, although this legal dispute
raised a number of difficult issues (and I have certainly simplified the facts for
the sake of discussion), the High Court was prevented from really getting to grips
with them because the parties couched their dispute in causal terms.
Put shortly, the first problem here is that the only rationale for requiring the
doctor to give a warning in such a case (at least on the facts as I have simplified
them) is to preserve the autonomy of the patient in being able to choose when
and where she ran the relevant risk. We must remember that the law often
ignores our interest in this sort of autonomy. For example, in the situation
described by Justice Mahoney the law does not require the person giving me
directions to tell me that both the left and right turnings seem to carry an equal
risk of my slipping on the pavement. Typically we are not required to warn of
such "apparently equal risks". So the first issue the High Court did not get to
analyse because the parties in Chappel v Hart presented their dispute in terms of
a dispute about causation was when and why duties to warn should be imposed
merely to protect the autonomy of decision-makers. Clearly a critical issue here
would be whether the decision-maker had questioned the adviser about the
relevant type of risk.42
Of course, there is nothing to prevent the law protecting such an interest by
imposing an obligation on one party for the benefit of another. But, as we saw in
the harness case, it is only once we know what the obligation is that we can
determine whether the behaviour allegedly in breach of that obligation injured
the interest protected by the obligation. Yet it is not convincing for the court
merely to assert that a warning of the "apparently equal risk" was the "very
thing" the obligation was imposed to ensure, or was "called into existence because
of the forseeability of that very risk".43 There must be an explanation of why it is
imposed in this situation when in other situations obligations to warn of
"apparently equal risks" are typically not imposed.
The other problem with liability here is that if the obligation is aimed at
protecting autonomy, then one might expect the damages to be assessed in
relation to the injury to that interest in autonomy, however that is to be
assessed.44 But here Mrs Hart recovered for injury to another interest, namely the
injury to her vocal cords, even though no one at the time the defendant failed to
warn would have foreseen that his conduct was exposing her to any increased
risk of injury to this interest at all. Again, the problem with the parties having
delivered the dispute to the High Court as one about causation is that it
hampered open scrutiny and analysis of this radical basis of recovery of damages.
Causation in Criminal Law
It is worth noting that one area in which the slippery idea of causation produces
particularly intractable problems at the interface of law and medicine is in the
criminal law. Chief Justice Malcolm45 and Professor Lanham46 both address this
area in their chapters, so my comment will be brief.
There are twin sources of difficulty here. First, in criminal cases of importance
the fact-finders are the members of the jury, and they give no reasons for their
decision. It is they who must, within the legal principles of responsibility
explained to them by the judge, apply the law to the case. Yet, unlike the law of
tort, those principles do not allow a separation of the question of historical
relevance from the question of whether a particular historical factor (the
defendant's wrongful conduct) is relevant to the law's purpose in the situation.
Thus, while the existing analytical categories of tort might be used to accomplish
this – with "causation in fact" being reserved for the historical relevance issue,
and the "remoteness" category accommodating the issue of the degree of
relevance an historical factor has for responsibility purposes, specifically for the
scope of responsibility for consequences47 – there is no equivalent conceptual
opportunity in the conceptual apparatus of the criminal law as it is currently
constructed. The two functions or issues are at present compounded in the one
step.
This gives rise to judicial statements in which causal language intertwines with
responsibility language. For example in Campbell v The Queen Burt CJ said:
It would seem to me to be enough if juries were told that the question of cause for them to decide is not a
philosophical or a scientific question, but a question to be determined by them applying their common
sense to the facts as they find them appreciating that the purpose of the inquiry is to attribute legal
responsibility in a criminal matter.48 (emphasis added).
Similarly in Royall v The Queen Deane and Dawson JJ wrote:
... it may assist the jury if the trial judge points out not only that there must be a causal connection
between the acts (or, more rarely, omissions) of the accused and the death of the deceased, but that the
causal connection must be sufficiently substantial to enable responsibility for the crime to be attributed to
the accused.49 (emphasis added).
What these quotations illustrate is that while some normative principles
governing the attribution of criminal responsibility will rest openly with the
judge whose exposition of them will be subject to the control of the appellate
courts, the jury's decision will also turn on other normative issues of principle
where the jury is free to apply their own choices, though unable to enunciate
them. This phenomenon is masked, however, because the language of "causation"
with which the jury is charged by the judge fuses these normative issues of
responsibility with the factual question of historical relevance. Thus, for example,
while the motive and intention of a doctor in administering or withdrawing
medical assistance will have no effect on the question of whether this conduct
was of historical relevance, it will typically be critical to one's attitude to the
question of his or her criminal responsibility. The same can be said of other
factors that form the focal point of competing approaches to "causation" in
criminal law50 such as forseeability.
Of course, we may well be content with this robust arrangement, at least in the
delicate areas of palliative care and so on. Perhaps we think juries will always
manage to, or appear to, "do the right thing" in relation to medical-defendants
while not giving unsettling symbolic messages in detailed written judgments to a
society unclear about the appropriate way to resolve the underlying moral and
policy dilemmas such situations throw up. My point is that such a state of affairs
is only achieved by our willingness to pack into the idea of "causation" issues of
great controversy and by the chameleon-like ability of that concept to mean
vastly different things to different people.
Conclusion
These few examples illustrate just some of the ways a gap in understanding can
sometimes open up between lawyers and scientists. One step courts could take to
help close that gap is by relying less on the causal packaging of legal disputes and
by paying more attention to the responsibility and the policy disputes that lie at
their heart.
* Professor within the Law Program of the Research School of Social Sciences at the Australian National
University in Canberra, and a Statutory Visiting Professor at Oxford University.
1 For a more detailed explanation of these levels of inquiry and my overall thesis with regard to
causation in legal disputes, see, J Stapleton, "Perspectives or Causation" in J Horder (ed), Oxford
Essays in Jurisprudence, 4th series, Oxford University Press, Oxford, 2000, pp61-84; "Legal Cause:
Cause-in-Fact and the Scope of Liability for Consequences" (2001) 54 Vanderbilt LJ 942-1009;
"Unpacking 'Causation'" in P Cane & J Gardner (eds), Relating to Responsibility, Hart Publishing,
Oxford, 2001.
2 For example that a factor "produced an outcome"; that an outcome "resulted from" a factor.
3 This is why lawyers who seek or offer some singular "legal notion of causation" do law a disservice
because this conflates usages from two quite separate inquiries.
4 Stapley v Gypsum Mines Ltd [1953] AC 663.
5 See Hart and Honoré, Causation in the Law, 2nd edn, Oxford University Press, Oxford, 1985, discussed
in "Perspectives on Causation" op cit, n1. Their NESS approach was popularised by R Wright,
"Causation in Tort Law" (1985) 73 Cal L Rev 1735; R Wright, "Causation, Responsibility, Risk,
Probability, Naked Statistics and Proof: Pruning the Bramble Bush by Clarifying the Concept" (1988)
73 Iowa Law Rev 1001. Liability for over-determined outcomes is one of the examples underlying
statements such as that of Mason CJ in March v Stramare (E & MH) Pty Ltd (1991) 171 CLR 506 at 509
that "the legal concept of causation differs from philosophical and scientific notions of causation".
6 See J Stapleton, "Unpacking 'Causation'" in P Cane & J Gardner (eds), Relating to Responsibility, Hart
Publishing, Oxford, 2001.
7 See J Stapleton, "Legal Cause: Cause-in-Fact and the Scope of Liability for Consequences" (2001) 54
Vanderbilt LJ 942-1009.
8 March v Stramare (E & MH) Pty Ltd (1991) 171 CLR 506.
9 See eg Cook v Lewis [1951] 1 SCR 830.
10 McGhee v National Coal Board [1973] 1 WLR 1.
11 [1984] QB 405.
12 [1956] AC 613. Compare Holtby v Brigham & Cowan (Hull) Ltd [2000] 3 All ER 421.
13 For another important and striking scenario consider a claim for nervous shock where "the psychiatric
expert witnesses could not distinguish between the shock associated with the crash in which she was
involved and the trauma brought about by the plaintiff's concern for the injuries suffered by her
husband": D Mendelson, The Interfaces of Medicine and Law, Ashgate/Dartmouth, London, 1998, at
p233.
14 This was what generated the problematic "evidentiary gap". In general, see J Stapleton. "The Gist of
Negligence, Part II: the Relationship between 'Damage' and Causation" (1988) 104 LQR 389 at 401-6.
15 See Stapleton, 1988, op cit, nl4, at 405. Contrast Wilsher v Essex Area Health Authority [1988] 2 WLR
557.
16 [1988] 2 WLR 557. In general see J Stapleton, 1988, op cit, n14.
17 In Betts v Whittingslowe (1945) 71 CLR 637 at 649 Dixon CJ said, albeit in relation to a statutory duty:
"breach of duty coupled with an accident of the kind that might thereby be caused is enough to
justify an inference, in the absence of any sufficient reason to the contrary, that in fact the accident
did occur owing to the act or omission amounting to the breach" (emphasis added). Clearly the
presence of another potential source of risk of that same accident should constitute "sufficient reason
to the contrary".
18 Judgment of Turner J in Griffiths v British Coal Corporation (23 January 1998, QBD).
19 Telegraph, 27 March 1999.
20 Guardian Weekly, 4 April 1999.
21 On possible special policy justifications for a limited application for McGhee see Stapleton, 1988, op cit,
nl4, at 406.
22 [1987] AC 750, on which see also Stapleton, 1988, op cit, n14.
23 See also Stapleton, 1988, op cit, n14.
24 In other words, the perception of historical involvement is relative. It is only seen as history because we
can envisage another world. This has both a proof aspect and a policy aspect. We can only establish
that something bore a but for relation to a transition if we can imagine a world without that factor.
Until gravity was a factor in the world that we noticed, no one would have thought to ask whether
part of the history of an event was the presence of gravity.
25 Thus an exhaustive description of the history of any meteorological process on earth would cite the
presence of gravity: the scientist can now envisage a world without gravity, and is thereby prompted
to ask whether gravity was a necessary or duplicative force producing the meteorological process.
26 By "shape" here I mean not only the incidence of the obligation (in the duty of care sense, a relational
issue) but its content in the sense of what is the type of conduct required for its discharge.
27 See eg McWilliams v Arrol [1962] 1 WLR 295.
28 See Mason, Chapter 7, below.
29 Empress Car Co (Abertillery) Ltd v National Rivers Authority [1998] 1 All ER 481; Reeves v
Commissioner of Police for the Metropolis [1999] 3 All ER 897.
30 See Ashby, Chapter 11, below.
31 [1995] 4 SCR 634.
32 (1997) 148 DLR (4th) 48. For another critical perspective on the Arndt case see T Honoré, "Causation
and Disclosure of Medical Risks" (1998) 114 LQR 52.
33 The so-called "modified objective test" from the earlier case of Reibl v Hughes (1980) 114 DLR (3rd) 1.
34 The majority of the court adopted this line for policy reasons. Yet if couched as an approach to the
history inquiry in the case, it seems very odd to be asking what someone else might have done. How
should that be relevant to what happened to this patient?
35 In contrast to Professor Honoré, I am skeptical about the utility of examining, in the context of legal
disputes, the patterns of how ordinary people use causal words. In my view this is too variable,
unstable and opaque to serve the goals of the law. Moreover, even when an ordinary person uses such
language he would be able to give his reasons for how and why he has used it a certain way in a
particular context. As the comment from Lord Steyn emphasises, this underlying reasoning needs to
be laid bare by judges resolving legal disputes.
36 [1999] 4 All ER 961 at 977.
37 March v Stramare (E & MH) Pty Ltd (1991) 171 CLR 506 at 516.
38 A less ambiguous term is "probability": see J Stapleton, "Unpacking 'Causation'" in P Cane & J Gardner
(eds), Relating to Responsibility, Hart Publishing, Oxford, 2001.
39 Except in the case of over-determined events such as the double hunters' case.
40 Mahoney JA in Alexander v Cambridge Credit Corp Ltd (1987) 9 NSWLR 310 at 333.
41 Chappel v Hart (1998) 195 CLR 232; 156 ALR 517.
42 Originally an issue of contention in Chappel v Hart (1998) 195 CLR 232; 156 ALR 517 esp at p542.
43 156 ALR 517 at 520 (per Gaudron J).
44 This is itself problematic because, as with injury to reputation, injury to autonomy cannot be directly
calculated in dollar amounts.
45 See Malcolm, Chapter 12, below.
46 See Lanham, Chapter 10, below.
47 This is one of the themes of "Perspectives on Causation" op cit, n1, where I argue for the renaming of
the "remoteness of damage" analytical category.
48 Campbell v The Queen (1981) WAR 286 at 290.
49 Royall v The Queen (1991) 65 ALJR 451 at 465.
50 See the fine exposition of these by Malcolm, op cit, n45.