5 Rebels Without a Cause?: Judges,
Medical and Scientific Evidence and the
Uses of Causation
GARY EDMOND AND DAVID MERCER*
Introduction
If we aim to improve our understanding of the relationship between legal
causation and scientific or medical causation, then attempts designed to identify
epistemological essences or focus on the putatively discrete categories of law,
science and medicine are likely to provide only limited assistance. From
observations of law and science in practice, images of causation would seem to be
epistemologically confusing and inconsistent. The following discussion is
intended as an exploratory examination of how judges in a variety of legal
settings (primarily personal injury cases) construct accounts of legal and
scientific causation against a background of rhetorical resources and practical
constraints. As an empirical generalisation, determining matters of causation in
legal settings involves the management of a more heterogeneous assortment of
concerns, constraints and resources, than is usually the case with the treatment of
causation in scientific and medical contexts — perhaps with the exception of
scientific controversies. In particular, those in the legal system tend to place
greater emphasis on the apportionment of responsibility and explaining specific
instances — the case at hand — rather than, as is often the case in scientific
settings, making generalisations about classes of relationships.1 However, as we
shall see, on occasion even the causal pronouncements in specific legal settings
and judgments appear designed to have more general social implications.
Images of causation are not homogeneous among the sciences. Scientific and
legal textbooks propose, often in ideal philosophical terms, standards by which an
explanation may be classified as causal. Notwithstanding these idealised
descriptions, in practical contexts different scientific sub-disciplines may hold
different visions of the types of explanations that can be classed as causal. In
these diverse scientific settings essential methodological and philosophical
categories may be of little relevance or utility. Among the sciences as well within
scientific subdisciplines there may be differing perceptions about what constitutes
an adequate causal explanation and even a relevant area of inquiry.
Historian of science Robert Proctor identifies differences among medical and
scientific explanations for the cause of cancer (an area of legal and scientific
causation we will explore more fully below). For example, in epidemiology causes
for cancer may be sought by looking at the "variations in the practices of specific
populations to identify agents or circumstances that might cause cancer".2
Debates over the adequacy of the identification of a cause often involve
considerations of the statistical strength of association between the suspected
agent and the cancer, latency periods, consistency between studies, dose-response
correlations and general assessments of biological plausibility. If the statistical
associations are considered sufficiently compelling, then detailed explanation and
the identification of specific biological processes may not need to be understood
in depth before a causal relationship will be confidently attributed. For molecular
biologists, however, the question of the causes of cancer may by focused quite
differently:
The questions of interest in molecular biology are often questions that abstract from particular causal
agents. The questions are typically: What makes a cancer cell begin to grow? What genetic loci are
altered in the process, and what does this do to cellular function? Why does the body's immune system
not reject a tumor as foreign, and how might immunity be reversed? The molecular approach generally
looks to processes underlying a broad spectrum of cancers — and not just to causes of specific tumors
{asbestos induced mesothelioma for instance). Molecular biologists may question the entire notion of
cause, as when Harold Varmus of the National Institutes of Health cautioned that "You can't do
experiments to see what causes cancer. It's not an accessible problem, and its not the sort of thing
scientists can afford to do."3
Even within similar areas of scientific practice, some scientists may accept a
particular form of explanation as causal whilst others may only adopt it
conditionally and display a degree of agnosticism as to whether or not such an
explanation is epistemologically warranted. Drawing upon an historical example,
Newton's theory of universal gravitation provided a causal explanation which
quickly dominated natural philosophical thought with respect to explanations of
celestial and terrestrial motion. It was elegant and efficacious. Nevertheless, the
idea of gravitation working by "action at a distance" without a clear mechanical
entity to explain its operation contravened a range of contemporary
commitments and troubled many of the proponents of the mechanical natural
philosophy, who were trying to expunge — from natural philosophical
endeavours — forms of causal explanation which did not rely on the more
mechanically plausible direct physical interaction of atoms and corpuscles.4
Eventually gravitation came to be understood as a satisfactory causal
explanation, and influenced the sorts of explanation that were conceived as
theoretically acceptable.
Writers such as Thomas Kuhn and Barry Barnes have argued that what is
classed as a causal explanation in the sciences is invariably linked to how it
conforms to existing theoretical frameworks and commitments as well as its
perceived practical and theoretical utility. Abstract philosophical and scientific
formulations (or canons) about what can be considered as a cause are of limited
guidance. As Kuhn explained:
To describe the cause or causes of an event is to explain why it occurred. Causes figure in physical
explanations, and physical explanations are generally causal. Recognizing that much, however is to
confront again the intrinsic subjectivity of some of the criteria governing the notion of cause ... [and] ...
new canons of explanation are born with new theories on which they are to a considerable extent,
parasitic.5
Like notions of scientific causation, legal causation has a body of literature and
some overlapping abstract philosophical canons but, as in the sciences, these
idealised and frequently abstract categories provide resources and malleable
constraints — not binding guides to practice.
Rather than try to extract the essences or classify the similarities and
differences between causation in science and medicine and causation in law, we
intend to illustrate some of the rhetorical processes, dilemmas and challenges,
confronting judicial attempts to establish satisfactory causal explanations
utilising scientific and medical evidence. In examining the assessment of expert
evidence in legal settings it is useful to avoid the a priori demarcation of the legal
elements of a causal explanation from the scientific elements. These types of
demarcation are usually among the areas of active contestation, definition and
"boundary working" undertaken by the protagonists in any particular litigation.6
Instead, it is more useful to conceptualise images of scientific causation and legal
causation as resources and constraints that the participants (judges in the
following analysis) strategically deploy and resist.
Images of legal causation provide a more formal and less flexible set of
resources than images of scientific causation because it is ultimately in the legal
domain that legitimacy is most important. This is not to suggest that images of
scientific and medical causation are completely malleable in legal settings.
Because both judicial and scientific authority are premised upon images of
rationality, where legal decisions involve the use of scientific or medical evidence
there are invariably pressures for the decision to appear consistent with what is
usually characterised as reliable scientific knowledge.7 Any deviations, apparent
or otherwise, require careful explanation, disclaimers, or skilful deflection. A
decision which appears to arbitrarily dismiss scientific authority or blatantly
assert the primacy of legal authority may have difficulty in maintaining its
legitimacy.8 This seems particularly applicable to mass torts, high profile
litigation and cases involving well resourced parties. Social and institutional
concerns, questions of policy and responsibility as well as the outcome of the
specific case continuously inform the construction of legally acceptable causal
explanations.
Law, Science, Judges, Society and Causation: Some
Themes
Judges endeavouring to determine the adequacy of causal evidence in particular
legal settings are engaged in acts of creative reconstitution and synthesis,
requiring the alignment and management of various narrative themes and
practical concerns. Some of these narratives and practical concerns are captured
beneath the following rubrics:
Alignment with the law;
Evaluating scientific and medical knowledge;
The specific contingencies of the case; and
Responsibility and social policy.
These overlapping categories, intentionally more indicative than exhaustive,
will be developed in more detail below.
Alignment with the law: precedent and the anticipated legal
reception
Legal images of causation involve assessments and representations of similarities
and differences between the present case and previous cases, consideration of the
implications of particular representations of causation, and the relationship
between scientific or medical evidence and the specific legal issue. In order to
satisfy these requirement for the purposes of establishing legal causation, judges
have at their disposal an extensive range of legal and other resources. Celebrated
legal texts such as Hart and Honoré's Causation in the Law,9 legal and folk
philosophies of science, earlier judgments and common sense can all be invoked
to strengthen the authority of legal decisions. Ideally, the construction of images
of causation in legal settings should be "superficially transparent" and "reflective".
However, because legal constructions of causation are infused with policy
considerations and more general conceptualisations of responsibility at law,
transparency and reflection sometimes appear qualified or absent. Aligning
questions of legal causation to medical and scientific causation and the specific
evidence at band is also rendered complex, both rhetorically and practically,
because in many, perhaps most, contexts scientific and medical evidence
presented to the court is packaged in anticipation of legal and judicial (sometimes
appellate) expectations.10 In mass toxic torts, such as the United States Bendectin
litigation considered below, the process of integrating scientific, policy and legal
considerations, may become highly refined. Some commentators have suggested
that the integration of legal concerns with scientific and/or medical orientations
is a major problem confronting contemporary legal systems and that the two
domains should remain discrete.11 Other commentators, most notably Roger
Smith and Brian Wynne, have suggested that in it is quite unrealistic to expect
such strict demarcations.12 In fields like epidemiology, forensic pathology,
forensic psychiatry, intellectual property and patent law, the growth and
epistemological texture of scientific and medical knowledge, including practical
concerns about what is eligible to be considered as a satisfactory causal
explanation, have evolved concurrently with legal rules, processes and values.
This tendency toward what might be described as forms of hybridised Saw-
science knowledge, with legal concerns entering into the practice and
representations of science and medicine, provide interesting challenges for judges
and commentators endeavouring to explain legal causation in relation to specific
circumstances where there are competing expert opinions. To some extent it
provides judges with a range of pre-assembled resources enabling them to more
easily link legal and scientific concerns. However, it may also put pressure on
judges to appear to address more general issues of scientific causation or appeal
to common sense models of causation in order to differentiate their views from
those of the experts. These two themes are addressed below, and in the case study
which forms the second half of this chapter.
Evaluating scientific and medical knowledge: comprehension,
interpretation and reconstitution
Judges frequently endeavour to align the rhetorical domains of science and law
with policy sensitivities. Consequently, the practice of constructing reliable
scientific evidence in such settings can assume a variety of forms. At one level
the perceived need for alignment encourages judges to show that they
comprehend the general parameters of the scientific and/or medical evidence of
causation presented by expert witnesses. This involves assessing not only general
models of scientific and medical causation but also the scientific and medical
knowledge relevant to ascriptions of specific causation. For example, has the
specific plaintiff established causation between their condition and the harm
allegedly flowing from the defendant's act or omission? Judges then, regularly
need to provide tractable simplifications of scientific arguments presented before
them. The existence of such simplified reconstructions of scientific and medical
knowledge provides a ready source for recriminations, from experts outside the
legal setting, who can claim that the simplification is a debased legal distortion,
and for dissenting judges to criticise the understanding of scientific medical
evidence by their peers.13 (In the case study below, the trial judge was criticised
by some of the appellate judges for his assessment of the scientific and medical
evidence.)
It is presumably easier for judges, determining matters of scientific and/or
medical causation, to produce and legitimate closure when expert disagreement is
"shallow" and there are few conspicuous policy or social implications associated
with the instant case. In contrast, in case congregations, class actions and where
policy matters are sensitive, and scientific disagreement more intense, judges may
find themselves being called upon to make difficult, de facto scientific, judgments
about causation. This may provide some insight into judicial requests for
alternative, usually more technocratic, fact-finding mechanisms including the use
of expert panels in mass torts in the United States and court-appointed experts in
civil litigation in the United Kingdom.14 In areas of long-standing scientific
controversy, the legal system may become one of the primary locations for the
resolution of debates about scientific and medical causation. In this context, the
example of the litigation surrounding Bendectin is instructive.
Over the decade or so of Bendectin litigation in the United States, there was
considerable debate around the types of scientific evidence best suited to
determining questions of medical and scientific (and legal) causation in relation
to the plaintiffs' injuries. The plaintiffs alleged that their birth defects were
caused by the maternal ingestion of the anti-nausea (morning sickness) drug
Bendectin (Debendox in Australia) during the first trimester of pregnancy.
Assessments of the plaintiffs' claims involved not only assessments of the
credibility of various experts but extended to include the credibility and
comparative value of different types of scientific knowledge and their causal
relevance.
The ability to shift the appropriate locus of relevant causation provided the
parties and the judges with multiple sites to contest causation and explain its
legal significance. Epidemiological debates were not restricted to general
causation but included assessments of the appropriateness of extrapolations to the
circumstances of specific individuals. The number of studies undertaken, their
type, the degree of consistency between them and the status of meta-analyses
were also subjected to debate and enrolment as resources informing and
explaining legal representations of causation. Further, the role and significance of
non-epidemiological evidence was also contested and frequently weighed against
the epidemiological record.15 The judicial balancing of different types of scientific
evidence is captured in the following extract from an appeal in the case of
Richardson by Richardson v Richardson-Merrell, Inc:
These three types of studies then — chemical, in vitro, and in vivo — cannot furnish a sufficient
foundation for a conclusion that Bendectin caused the birth defects at issue in this case. Studies of this
kind, singly or in combination, are not capable of proving causation in human beings in the face of the
overwhelming body of contradictory epidemiological evidence.16
The degree of (scientific) pro-activity displayed by courts in the Bendectin
litigation continued beyond merely prioritising the significance of epidemiology
in settling questions of scientific and medical causation.17 It extended to the
influential Daubert v Merrell Dow Pharmaceuticals, Inc judgment where United
States Supreme Court judges actually stipulated the types of methodological
strictures scientists should adopt in producing their knowledge for it to be classed
as scientific and sufficiently reliable for admissibility in legal proceedings.18 In
this context it was not only judges seeking alignment with a set of scientific
experts — witnesses who may have provided evidence and opinions — but rather
an instance of judges seeking rhetorical alignment with meta-scientific experts
such as sociologists, philosophers and historians of science.19
In summary, when constructing legal versions of scientific causation, judges
need to engage in processes of simplification and synthesis to show they
comprehend the scientific and medical controversy but also to provide an
intelligible and tractable model of the evidence that can be applied to the
construction and justification of their decisions. The role of courts in mass
litigation has shown judges going further and in a sense actually constructing
more overt models of legal-scientific knowledge about causation, relying on a
diverse assortment of meta-scientific resources.20
The specific contingencies of the case: “reflexive realism” and
“judicial scepticism”
As well as responding to images of law, the evidence and what might be
conceived as social and policy concerns, judges also shape their assessments of
legal, medical and scientific causation in ways that correspond with the
contingencies of the specific case. In such instances, overt reference to policy
considerations, or making scientific judgments, or pronouncing on causation as a
matter of law may in themselves fail to provide adequate legitimacy for the
judgment. In particular, the peculiarities of the individual case — including
evidence pertaining to the case — can be employed by judges to explain apparent
inconsistencies among decisions or to allow recovery where the general evidence
might prevent other plaintiffs from achieving similar level of success.21
Tony Ward argues that in some instances judges may revert to impressionistic
assessments of the credibility of the witnesses and the coherence and plausibility
of narratives. According to Ward, the appeal to contingency may reflect evidence
of judges developing, to use the terminology of Ulrich Beck,22 a degree of
reflexive postmodernity — that is, a degree of ambivalence toward scientific
explanations and some awareness of their limitations. Regardless of whether we
fully accept Ward's thesis,23 there would appear to be instances where, if nothing
more, in response to the complexity and intransigent difficulties involved in
establishing other rationales for causation, sceptical realism would seem to
become a viable judicial option. The difficulties encountered in attempts to
articulate causal evidence, capturing some of the nuances and tensions involved,
can be formidable. Ward quotes Lord Hoffman, from a case involving a disputed
genetic engineering patent, to capture some of these themes:
[Specific] findings of fact, even by the most meticulous of judges, are an inherently incomplete statement
of the impression that was made upon him by the evidence. His expressed findings are always
surrounded by a penumbra of imprecision as to emphasis, relative weight, minor qualification and
nuance ... which time and language do not permit exact expression, but which may play an important
part in the judge's overall evaluation.24
It may well be that judicial fatigue, a lack of resources, pressures of expedition,
consistency and reflexivity all influence the construction of legal categories and
decision-making in relation to questions of medical and scientific causation.
Responsibility and social policy: differentiation, deflection and
incorporation
Regardless of whether they are articulated, judgments in cases involving
scientific and medical evidence of causation inescapably involve a range of
institutional, social and policy considerations. Invariably, questions of causation
become linked to images of duty of care, foreseeability, the costs of compensation,
public policy concerns, the worthiness of plaintiffs, the reprehensibility of the
defendant's conduct and the social implications of the particular outcome and its
explanation. In some contexts this may lead judges to differentiate explicitly
between the nature of legal, as opposed to the nature of scientific and medical
causation.25 On other occasions, apparent differences or gaps between legal and
scientific approaches will be downplayed or ignored.
In an analysis of judicial endeavours at establishing medical and legal
causation, where there may have been multiple agents linked to the injury, Helen
Reece examined the South Australian case of Birkholz.26 In that case the plaintiff
claimed that he had contracted Brucellosis (an infectious disease) through work
in the defendant's abattoirs. In the Supreme Court his claim had been rejected on
the basis that although he may have been infected through his employment, there
was no way to determine by which, of a number of possible paths, he had been
infected, or by what method the employer could have removed the risk. On
appeal, the Supreme Court (in banco) found in favour of the appellant. It was
held, not only that it was more probable than not that he had contracted the
disease through handling infected animals, but if the plaintiff had been provided
with better information and protective clothing he could have avoided infection.
King CJ suggested that even if the precise method of infection had not been
ascertained, the court could have found in favour of the appellant. King CJ's
reasoning provides an example of the rhetorical differentiation between legal and
medical causation in the light of notions of responsibility and justice:
Has the failure to take those precautions been shown to have caused or materially contributed to the
contracting of the disease by the appellant? It might be argued as a matter of strict logic, that the fact
that the given precautions would substantially diminish the risk, does not prove that failure to take those
precautions materially contributed to the appellant's infection unless it can be established how that
infection occurred. But the law's view of causation is less concerned with logical and philosophical
considerations than with the need to produce a just result to the parties involved.27
The differentiation of medical and legal causation may also follow from
burdens of proof entailed by explicit policy frameworks such as strict liability, the
balance of probabilities (civil), beyond reasonable doubt (criminal) and in the case
of emerging precautionary principles entailed by environmental risk
management, where the possible harm may be seen as sufficient to warrant the
development of a low threshold (but not one which eliminates the need for
scientific evidence) for establishing causation.
Jane Holder and Sue Elworthy, provide an example of this type of
precautionary rationale in their discussion of a decision by the European Court of
Justice in relation to the proof of causation required to justify a ban on beef
exports from the United Kingdom in 1996 at the time of the BSE crisis:
Scientist have as yet only an imperfect knowledge of Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease and more particularly, its
recently discovered variant. Its fatal consequences were reiterated several times at the hearing. There is
at present no cure for it. Death ensues several months after diagnosis. Since the most likely explanation
for this fatal disease is exposure to BSE, there can be no hesitation. Whilst acknowledging the economic
and social difficulties caused by the Commission's decision in the United Kingdom, the court cannot but
recognize the paramount importance to be accorded to the protection of health.28
There are also circumstances where social and policy considerations
circumvent the effects of scientific and medical evidence of causation. Sometimes
its relevance is deflected rather than confronted or differentiated by judges. A
fairly extreme, but nonetheless instructive example can be drawn from the
reluctance displayed by some courts in the United States to use blood testing to
determine paternity disputes in divorce cases. Shari Rudavsky traces numerous
cases from the 1930s to the 1990s where several courts evinced a strong reluctance
to "bastardise" children.29 Once a child was born within marriage, courts were
often unwilling to allow the child to be submitted, during subsequent divorce
proceedings, to blood tests which might reveal that their legal father was not in
fact their biological father. Rather than challenge the scientific accuracy or
veracity of blood testing per se there was a tendency to deflect its ultimate
relevance to the causal issues that courts were adjudicating. Rudavsky quotes the
judgment of a 1963 appeal in Pennsylvania, to illustrate her point. Judge
Woodside explained:
it is cruel for the law to inject such doubts [of paternity] into a child's mind when there are no
circumstances to support the doubts except an allegation by an irate man who previously had been
known to the child and the world as its father. It is the taking of the blood and not the result of it, which
does the harm. ... Pricking the skin to get the blood is an act which plants indelibly upon the mind of a
child the doubt as to its paternity which it will carry thereafter forever.30
Rudavsky traces the origins of this presumption to social policies underpinning
United States divorce law designed to protect children from the social stigma of
illegitimacy and potential financial hardship flowing from the withdrawal of
"paternal" child support.
The impact of social factors in shaping standards of proof for medical
causation may also be less overt. On some occasions there may be a tendency for
legal, scientific and medical concerns to be incorporated or fused together. In
some contexts such as, to use Joseph Sanders' terminology, case congregations,
where the determinations by courts take on a cumulative character, establishing
not only legal but scientific precedent, courts may be far more circumspect in
acknowledging a gap between legal and scientific assessments of causation.31
This is regular feature of high profile mass tort litigation where tremendous
human and economic stakes and public interest place considerable pressure on
judges to make sure "they get it right". The usual judicial resources of insulation
and deflection tend to be less effective when placed within the scrutiny of
numerous well resourced and interested constituencies. For instance, while judges
in the United States Bendectin litigation commented on the policy significance of
the litigation — including the need for judicial rationing and accepting the
authority of earlier decisions — there was also a strong impulse to establish an
authoritative declaration about the state of "Bendectin science". The production of
an authoritative statement involved procedural innovations such as bifurcating
proceedings to separate causation from other issues such as liability and damages
(in the Multi-District Litigation), epistemological "innovations" establishing the
primacy of epidemiological studies over other types of evidence and the adoption
of restrictive models of statistical significance and relative risk as criteria for
determining the admissibility of epidemiological evidence and establishing
medical causation in legal settings.32
Returning to the example of the Richardson appeal. Drawing authority from
earlier decisions in other circuits, the DC Circuit Court of Appeal combined legal
precedent with an implicit scientific assessment of their preference for causal
explanations to be consistent with epidemiological evidence:
The court (Lynch: an earlier appeal) noted the growing body of law recognizing the importance of
epidemiological evidence in establishing causation in cases in which no direct evidence is available.33
As a resource to close the Bendectin litigation, these innovations seem to have
been influenced by policy concerns, but their authority was simultaneously
dependent upon emphasising and defending a close alignment with a particular
version of the scientific record.34 The pro-active role of judges in constructing,
reconstructing and deconstructing scientific and medical approaches to causation
in specific institutional settings overlaps with our previous discussion.
The foregoing discussion has developed a variety of heuristic categories
outlining some of the major epistemological resources and concerns negotiated
by judges confronted with contests over medical and scientific evidence
influencing the development of legal causation. Depending on the circumstances
of the case, the history of similar types of litigation and a range of other
contingencies, it is possible to imagine greater priority or emphasis being ascribed
to some of these considerations rather than others. So far we have attempted to
provide some sense of these resources and constraints in a somewhat
impressionistic manner, drawing upon examples from a range of legal encounters.
In the remainder of this chapter we intend to elaborate upon these observations
in the context of a more detailed case study of one asbestos related appeal.
Case Study: Seltsam Pty Ltd v McGuiness; James Hardie & Co Pty
Ltd v McGuiness35
This case study focuses upon a recent application to the Court of Appeal from the
Dust Diseases Tribunal (NSW). The (largely) uncontested facts presented at the
trial and appeal are roughly as follows. The plaintiff, McGuiness, was 62 years of
age at the time of the trial. Between 1950 and 1991 he had worked in factories
owned by the defendants (Seltsam and James Hardie) and been exposed to
asbestos through the manufacture and delivery of fibro-cement sheeting. In the
early years McGuiness may have been exposed to both crocidolite (blue asbestos)
and chrysotile (white asbestos), though predominantly chrysotile.36 In 1997
McGuiness was diagnosed with renal cell carcinoma (RCC) of the left kidney.
This malignancy was fast growing and at the time of an expedited trial
McGuiness had only a short time to live.37
At the trial, the issues of duty, foreseeability as well as the extent of exposure
were all resolved in favour of the plaintiff.38 The defendants owed a duty of care
to their former employee and foreseeability was resolved on the basis that risks
associated with asbestos exposure had been known for decades.39 Judge McGuire,
the trial judge in the Dust Diseases Tribunal, found that McGuiness' exposure to
asbestos had been "heavy".40 Because of these determinations, in combination
with disagreements around the scientific record, argument was focused on the
issue of causation.41 The legal question to be answered, or proved, was: On the
balance of probabilities, did exposure to asbestos cause or materially contribute to
McGuiness' kidney cancer? One factor confounding this assessment was a known
association between RCC, obesity and smoking among men of the plaintiff's age.
The plaintiff, McGuiness, had been overweight and a moderate smoker.
Below, it is our intention to provide several examples from what we contend
are the interrelated domains of law, science and society to illustrate how they
were strategically composed to not only rhetorically distance or align legal
discursive formations from other professional discourses but also enable judges
confronted ostensibly with the same law and evidence to produce decisions with
quite distinct legal implications. By focusing on the leading judgment of
Spigelman CJ and the dissent of Stein JA we hope to provide a tentative
phenomenology of the judicial production and recognition of causal
knowledge(s). We accept certain, perhaps intractable, difficulties in proving some
of our contentions, but think our overall approach offers a plausible and
contextually sensitive means — consistent with some contemporary theorising
about the sciences and legal practice42 — of conceptualising judicial approaches to
the complex and refractory issues raised through the use of scientific and medical
evidence of causation in civil litigation and judicial decision making.
Seltsam: Alignment with the law
Abstract legal formulations of causation tend to allow considerable flexibility in
application. Recognising that the appellate judges in the Seltsam appeal all agreed
on the precise, admittedly abstract, legal formulation (developed below) confers
limited expository benefit because it is through their application, that is their
interaction with the evidence and a range of social, policy and institutional
assumptions that the consensual legal standard(s) actually achieves its various
meanings and their social implications in this particular setting. In this way
judicial consensus around the relevant legal principle hardly constitutes a defence
of (legal) positivism or the repudiation of a range of more critical hermeneutic
approaches to legal practice.43 All of the judges agreed that the appropriate
formulation was that the plaintiff, McGuiness, was required to prove that on the
balance of probabilities his exposure to asbestos caused or materially contributed
to his renal cell carcinoma. The phrase "caused or materially contributed to"
already possessed a considerable lineage in Anglo-Australian common law.44 In
addition, the question of whether something had caused or materially contributed
to an injury was to be decided using "common sense". Again, all of the judges
agreed on this approach, citing the Australian High Court authority of March v
Stramare.45 Determinations of causation, even those involving complex scientific
and medical evidence were to be undertaken with the aid of common sense.
Recourse to "common sense" affords a degree of insulation to judges: they do not
have to become amateur scientists.46 Despite agreement on the relevant law at a
level of generality, in the judgments of Spigelman CJ and Stein JA the application
of the phrase "caused or materially contributed to" to the evidentiary array would
prove more heterogeneous.
In his judgment Spigelman CJ devoted considerable attention to a review of the
evidentiary requirements for an action in tort. Citing a number of earlier cases,
and pre-figuring his own decision, he explained that evidence of a mere
possibility had never been sufficient to sustain the causal component of a tort
claim.47 Notwithstanding this commitment, both Spigelman CJ and Stein JA
accepted that judges were empowered to translate a scientific (or evidentiary)
possibility into a legal probability. It was within the discretion of the judge to
conclude that "the possible was the actual cause".48
But if medical science is prepared to say that it is a possible view, then, in my opinion, the judge after
examining the lay evidence may decide that it is probable. It is only when medical science denies that
there is any such connection that the judge is not entitled in such a case to act on his own intuitive
reasoning.49
And,
There are cases in which medical science cannot identify the biological or pathological mechanisms by
which disease develops. In some cases medical science cannot determine the existence of a causal
relationship. Such a state of affairs is not necessarily determinative of the existence or non-existence of a
causal relationship for purposes of attributing legal responsibility.50
The concept of a legal probability would not be automatically equated with a
scientific or philosophical probability. Both Spigelman CJ and Stein JA endorsed
the position outlined in the previous extracts, accepting that judges were not
generally constrained by the opinions of medical science.
For Spigelman CJ, epidemiological studies, in conjunction with other evidence
of causation were to be treated as circumstantial evidence that could
cumulatively, if not individually, meet the necessary legal burden of proof even if
they were understood only to suggest the possibility of an association among
medical or scientific experts. Implicitly, judges were competent to translate
evidence of individual or combined possibilities into legal probabilities. Finding
that the expert evidence did not disprove the plaintiff's contention, Spigelman CJ
was nonetheless unwilling to translate what he described as a medical possibility
into a legal probability and thereby apportion liability and damages.
Basically, Stein JA adopted the same legal approach as Spigelman CJ, but
concluded that the evidence before the Dust Diseases Tribunal and the Court of
Appeal was sufficient to warrant a finding that "on the balance of probabilities,
exposure to asbestos can cause or materially contribute to the contraction of
RCC".51
Additionally, both Stein JA and Spigelman CJ referred to a principle espoused
in the earlier High Court appeal of Chappel v Hart52 where McHugh J had
explained that "If a wrongful act or omission results in an increased risk of injury
to the plaintiff and that risk eventuates, the defendant's conduct has materially
contributed to that injury occurring."53 For Stein JA, the plaintiff's evidence was
sufficient to warrant finding that an increased risk of injury — that injury (RCC)
having materialised — had, for legal purposes, caused the plaintiff's injury.
In responding to the respondent's (plaintiff) assertion that some evidence of a
relationship between a cause and a realised risk was enough to base a legal
finding of causation, Spigelman CJ explained that the likelihood of the increased
risk had to be proved to the level of on the balance of probabilities or higher:
The starting point of McHugh J's analysis was that it had been established on the balance of probabilities
that the conduct did create or increase the risk of injury, "and that risk had eventuated".
This starting point is the very matter in issue in the present case. Was there evidence on the basis of
which the trial judge could conclude, on the balance of probabilities, that there was an increased risk of
injury and that that risk had "eventuated" in the specific disease of the Respondent?
If there was such evidence then ... the tribunal of fact was "entitled" to find that the conduct which
increased risk, materially contributed to the injury — entitled, but not, of course, required to so find.54
That position was explicitly endorsed in the judgment of Stein JA.55
The mere possibility of an increased risk was insufficient to support an action
in tort unless judicially transformed to the status of a legal probability. According
to Spigelman CJ, finding the relationship between asbestos exposure and RCC to
constitute only a legal possibility functioned to distinguish the case of Seltsam
from the circumstances of the earlier cases of Chappel v Hart, Naxakis v Western
General Hospital56 and McGhee v National Coal Board.57 In those cases there had
not been expert disagreement about whether the increased risk actually caused or
materially contributed to the injury on the balance of probabilities.58 Similar
issues had also been addressed in considerable detail in the jurisdiction through
the earlier appeal from the mesothelioma (another asbestos related illness) case of
Bendix.59
In finally disposing of the matter Spigelman CJ drew upon extrinsic legal
commitments to resolve what he acknowledged was a difficulty:
There is a tension between the suggestion that any increased risk is sufficient to constitute a "material
contribution", and the clear line of authority that a mere possibility is not sufficient to establish causation
for legal purposes. The latter is too well established to be qualified by the former.60
Another way in which the articulation of legal standards influenced the
reception, expression and interpretation of the evidence was through the strategic
framing of expert testimony. Once again "gaps" between scientific and legal
images of causation are purposively managed. Some conspicuous examples of
evidence shaped for use in a legal setting sensitive to articulated legal standards
and burdens of proof are recorded among the Seltsam judgments. The hybridised
nature of law-science knowledges — involving processes of extraction,
simplification, emphasis, modification and translation — seems to be exemplified
in the following ostensibly scientific opinions. Although polemical ascriptions are
always available, there seem to be few reasons to characterise the strategic
framing as evidence of "junk science", charlatanism or some debased or unreliable
form of scientific evidence designed exclusively for the exigencies of litigation.61
First, experts appearing for the plaintiff testified in the following terms:
McCredie: "On the balance of probabilities, obesity and exposure to
asbestos materially contributed to the causation of renal cell carcinoma in
this case."62 (emphasis added)
Burns: "In my opinion on the balance of probabilities, his asbestos
exposure while working with Wunderlich & Hardies in the period 1950 to
1984 contributed to the development of his renal carcinoma."63 (emphasis
added)
Nankivell: "On the balance of probabilities this past exposure to asbestos
could have made a material contribution to the development of his renal
cell carcinoma."64 (emphasis added)
Without exception, all of these examples present evidence in the contextually
sensitive terms of legal causation and the burden of proof. Only Nankivell's
qualified "could" is independently incapable of fulfilling the required legal
standard, although it was susceptible to redemption through judicial conversion
— particularly if combined with other evidence.
Expert witnesses
For the defendants
For the plaintiff
Dr Burns – thoracic surgeon
Professor Berry – epidemiologist
Dr McCredie – epidemiologist
Professor Henderson – pathologist
Dr Lee – thoracic surgeon
Dr Nankivell – nephrologist
Professor McLaughlin – epidemiologist
Dr Katelaris – urologist
Whereas the plaintiff's experts framed their opinions in legally sensitive
terminology, the defence experts called to challenge the association between
asbestos exposure and RCC tended to utilise an ostensibly non-legal register, or at
least this was how their testimony is selected and represented in Spigelman CJ's
judgment. These expert opinions pertaining to causation provide few indications
of translation into legally relevant terminology. The defence held an interest in
encouraging the trial and appellate judges to align legal causation with their
version of scientific causation, that is, to make legal and scientific images of
causation isomorphic thereby naturalising the defendant's position. (This is not
intended to substitute the defence representation for a putatively proper approach
to the evidence.) In this way, the following scientific opinions provide support for
the defendant's case without requiring the judge to explain and legitimate any
apparent differences between the legal decision and scientific authority:
McLaughlin: "The epidemiological evidence for an association between
asbestos and an increased risk of renal cell cancer is scanty and
problematic."65 (emphasis added)
Lee: "... concluded that the epidemiological evidence was limited and of
insufficient strength to permit a conclusion that a causal relationship
existed."66 (emphasis added)
Katelaris: "... asserted that the link between asbestos exposure and renal
cell carcinoma had not been proved."67 (emphasis added)
We should not forget that Spigelman CJ had endorsed earlier decisions
empowering judges to locate legal, causation on the basis of a limited record,
with scant and problematic evidence and even in the absence of scientific proof.
Notwithstanding the strategic benefit of ostensibly scientific — that is, non-legal
— posturing, the defence experts were also capable of translating their evidence
into highly contingent, legally inspired terminology:
Henderson: "It is certainly my view that this does not equate to a
probability of causation or material contribution by asbestos at the level
of 50% or greater (in other words the relationship at this time is no more
than speculative or possible and it does not achieve probability status)."68
(emphasis added)
Having accepted, like Spigelman CI, that judges could epistemoiogically
transform scientific and medical possibilities to render them capable of satisfying
the legal burden of causation, Stein JA sought to distinguish and contain some of
the scientific statements in order to control their legal implications. This was the
converse to Spigelman CJ's presentation of a range of scientific opinions as if they
were self-evidently appropriate, without any modifications, to resolve the legal
determination. Assessing whether the term "confidently concluded" appended to
the end of an epidemiological study had direct legal bearing, Stein JA indicated
that: "Professor Berry also said that when the Mandel authors mentioned
'confidently concluded', they would not have had the balance of probabilities in
mind."69 (emphasis added).
Confident conclusions are the language of science. Professors McLaughlin and Berry agreed, the former
assuming that the words connoted a higher standard than the balance of probabilities.70
In the legal forum, Stein JA was not bound to accept the scientific language
and apparent implications of a scientific study. Significantly though, he felt
compelled to explain modifications and qualifications.
Seltsam: Evaluating scientific and medical knowledge
Before proceeding to consider the treatment of the evidence, just one caveat. We
do not intend to suggest that the approaches adopted by either Spigelman CJ or
Stein JA were (im)plausible, (un)persuasive, right or wrong. Indeed, without
dismissing one approach as simply mistaken, the concurrent plausibility of two
quite different judgments may be their most interesting and analytically
demanding feature.71
The party-oriented presentation of evidence in adversary legal systems exposes
trial and appellate judges to two (or more) purposive evidentiary arrangements
organised according to perceptions of legal standards, tacit and experiential skills
and to some extent the anticipation of rulings and areas of perceived strength,
weakness and conflict.72 Interestingly, it seems that the contest surrounding the
issue of causation in relation to the epidemiological record was perceived as an
area of strength by both defendants and plaintiffs.
Testimony from the trial and the appellate judgments in Seltsam suggests
continuous struggles and negotiations around the level of scientific support for a
causal association between asbestos exposure and RCC and its assessment in
terms of legal causation. But the contest over the sufficiency of the scientific
evidence was not restricted, as in the discussion in previous section, to the legally
sensitive conclusions of scientists and their representation in judgments. All of
the appellate judges provided a review of the expert evidence against
formulations of the legal backdrop. Having examined the basic agreement
between Spigelman CJ and Stein JA over the appropriate law, it is also of interest
to examine their assessments of the evidence, its relative strengths and
weaknesses and its legal significance. It is not our intention to suggest that the
legal standards, imprecise or flexible as they may have been, necessarily pre-exist
and determine the judicial interpretation of the evidence. Rather, it is our
contention that the interpretation of the evidence, like the identification and
interpretation of the relevant legal principles, allows (or introduces) degrees of
indeterminacy and interpretative flexibility. Without contending that the legal
standards are meaningless, the following account might be used to support our
contention that what counts as "the law" and "the evidence" are to varying
degrees mutually constituting in legal settings. Their representation affords
freedom and constraints.73 The framing and description of what might be
represented as "the law" and "the evidence" are closely related and purposively
combined to support particular outcomes. In contrast to the judicial implication,
we would contend that the outcome of the Seltsam litigation can be interpreted to
suggest that the law and the evidence are rarely as constraining as the judges
would seem to indicate. Differences in the assessments provided by Stein JA and
Spigelman CJ would seem to suggest that the actual verdict was not the only
plausible outcome.
Finding in favour of the defendants on the basis that the plaintiff's evidence of
a cause or material contribution did not rise above a possibility — scientifically or
legally — Spigelman CJ explained the decisions on the basis of what was
described as a comprehensive examination of the scientific evidence. Like Davies
AJA, the other judge forming the majority, Spigelman CJ obliquely criticised the
trial judge for failing to undertake a more detailed examination of the evidence,
especially the defendants' criticism of the plaintiff's epidemiological evidence.
Spigelman CJ's discussion of the evidence is structured around and supplemented
— but not determined — by the legal standards articulated in his judgment.
Despite a number of references to a range of non-scientific, social and policy
considerations influencing legal approaches to causation, Spigelman CJ's analysis
of "the evidence" and its application to "the law" appear as if they actually
determine his decision-making. If there were policy reasons shaping his view of
causation they were not made explicit, other than an obscure reference to the
trial being conceived as some kind of test case.
Very briefly, Spigelman CJ found (or represented) the defendants' evidence (as)
convincing and the plaintiff's evidence only capable of supporting the possibility
of an association between asbestos exposure and RCC. Despite emphasising the
need to examine the evidence in its entirety, most of Spigelman CJ's analysis was
directed toward the epidemiological evidence. Even though he placed stress on
the need to assess the "strength and quality" of the epidemiological studies,
Spigelman CJ nevertheless emphasised the number of studies reporting no
significant association between asbestos exposure and RCC.74 Spigelman CJ
privileged the cohort studies and dismissed much of the plaintiff's evidence for an
association by drawing upon the Bradford-Hill postulates to suggest that
McGuiness' epidemiological evidence lacked consistency with other studies and
did not demonstrate a dose-response relationship.75 While Spigelman CJ did not,
as some United States courts had, require studies demonstrating a relative risk
(RR) of 2.0 or higher, he expressed a preference for studies approximating that
standard.76 That preference offered the judiciary the following advantages. It
could simplify legal determinations — to some extent judges could defer to the
epidemiological record — and might encourage out-of-court settlements.
According to Spigelman CJ, the plaintiff could offer few studies suggesting
more than a moderate association between RCC and asbestos exposure. In
addition, the claim was compromised by a range of confounding factors such as
the plaintiff's obesity and history of smoking. Evidence of a biopsy of the
plaintiff's kidney had revealed no asbestos fibres even though a biological
mechanism — accepted as plausible by most of the experts — had been proffered.
Animal studies were accorded little weight and two epidemiological studies
indicating strong associations between asbestos exposure and RCC were
inoculated through reference to those results as merely curious. Ultimately,
Spigelman CJ relied upon what he characterised as the great majority of
epidemiological studies demonstrating no convincing association — that is
beyond the level of a legal or scientific possibility.
In contrast, Stein JA found that the same evidence was capable of supporting
the legal requirement that on the balance of probabilities the plaintiff's exposure
to asbestos had caused or materially contributed to his illness. Even though
Spigelman CJ had acknowledged the need to assess the strength and quality of
the epidemiological record,77 in actuality he made few endeavours to do so,
preferring a weight of numbers approach. That assessment, however, is a feature
of Stein JA's judgment.78 Stein JA did not simply divide the epidemiological
evidence between cohort and case control studies and then apportion weight on
the basis of the larger number of cohort studies demonstrating no association.79
Instead, he distinguished between the studies and, like McGuire below,80
accorded considerable weight to one particular epidemiological study, the Mandel
Study, undertaken by two of the experts (McLaughlin and McCredie) retained by
the parties and engaged in the proceedings.
The Mandel study was a large international case-control study. It was the most
recent epidemiological attempt to assess the relationship between asbestos and
RCC. The Mandel Report concluded:
Several investigators have found increased risks of kidney cancer associated with exposure to asbestos. ...
Case-control studies not showing an association with asbestos exposure had small numbers of exposed
workers. ... Our study, with 200 exposed cases provides additional evidence that asbestos increases the
risk of kidney cancer. Nevertheless, further research of asbestos-exposed workers is needed to
demonstrate a relationship with either duration of employment or amount of exposure before a causal
association can be confidently concluded.81 (emphasis added)
Like Stein JA's judgment, the Mandel Report distinguished among
epidemiological studies and different types of evidence, drawing attention to the
small size and limited participant exposure of some epidemiological studies
(including some of those performed by McLaughlin) that had reported no
association between asbestos exposure and RCC. Stein JA stressed that the
Mandel Report concluded that "an association with asbestos was confirmed." The
Mandel Report found a RR of 1.4 over six population groups in 5 countries.
Moderate associations, those involving RR in the order of 1.4-1.7 were, in
conjunction with the other evidence, for Stein JA, adequate to fulfil the "material
contribution" component of legal causation.
For Stein JA, the importance of the Mandel study was closely associated with
the participation of the epidemiologists McLaughlin and McCredie.82 Indeed,
their involvement led Stein JA to produce a number of strategic contrasts.
Recalling that McLaughlin had been critical of case-control studies, Stein JA
found it curious that he had been involved in the Mandel study, acting as one of
its principals.
The Professor was highly critical of case-control studies. Given this position, one might ask why he
associated himself, as one of the authors, with a multi-national case-control study in six centres spread
among five countries. Indeed, as I have mentioned, he agreed that he was the coordinator of the Mandel
study and set the parameters and methodology for it. It is apparent that he was among the principal
authors, if not the principal author.83
In the judgment of Stein JA, McLaughlin's in-court testimony is characterised
as strangely inconsistent with his published scientific opinions: "as different as
chalk and cheese".84 Elsewhere, Stein JA, criticised McLaughlin for improprieties
in his approach to peer review in medical publications.85 Throughout the trial, the
dominant expert contest had been fought around the meaning of the
epidemiological record. The judgment of Stein J A provides some sense of the
importance of, and relationship between, the representation of scientists, judicial
images of scientific propriety and the status accorded to particular testimony.
McLaughlin's evidence, unlike the testimony of McCredie, was apparently shaped
for the exigencies of litigation. This stigmatised and purportedly inferior
knowledge is sometimes referred to by the more pejorative label "science for
litigation".86 Having identified these "aberrations", the evidence of McLaughlin
was rendered highly questionable or unreliable, indeed sufficiently questionable
for Stein JA to dismiss it as unconvincing.
Like Spigelman CJ, Stein JA also drew upon the Bradford Hill postulates to
explain his decision. Unlike Spigelman CJ, however, Stein JA thought there was
sufficient consistency among the plaintiff's epidemiological evidence and
particularly across the population centres covered in the Mandel study.87 Stein JA
accepted McCredie's opinion that a dose-response relationship was a desirable
but non-essential feature of epidemiological analysis.88 In addition, Stein JA
suggested that the non-epidemiologieal evidence assisted the plaintiff's claim.
The availability of a plausible biological mechanism supported by animal studies
and tests on the urine of workers, cancer produced through injecting asbestos
into the kidneys of rats, and an appropriate latency period all provided what
Stein JA characterised as common sense support for the attribution of a causal
relationship between asbestos exposure and RCC.89 He also referred to judicial
authority, the decision in Baldwin, to account for complications in
epidemiological evidence when associated with multiple causal factors, such as
smoking and obesity.90 But Stein JA went even further, questioning the reliance
placed, particularly by the defendants, on epidemiological evidence.91 Overall,
Stein JA agreed with the position adopted by the trial judge, namely that the
evidence supported the contention that asbestos had caused or materially
contributed to the plaintiff's illness.
Significantly, none of these previous representations determines the
appropriate manner in which to interpret the scientific evidence, or how to apply
it to the relevant law, even if we were able to agree that either category was
stable or could constrain its application or use. Instead, they provide some
indication of the epistemic indeterminacy associated with the evidence and the
law and their putatively principled interaction in the realm of legal causation.
Two further evidential matters also provide some additional insight into the
special epistemic circumstances attending the use of expert opinion evidence in
litigation. First, among their grounds of appeal, Seltsam argued that some of the
evidence provided by McCredie and Burns was inadmissible because they had
each strayed into domains where they were ineligible to testify because they
possessed no "specialised knowledge" under s79 of the Evidence Act 1995
(NSW).92 McCredie had apparently testified, without medical training, about the
plaintiff's specific injuries and Bums, a medical practitioner, had expressed
opinions about epidemiological studies. The Court of Appeal rejected this attempt
at interscientific boundary working on the grounds that no objection had been
taken at trial, the breaches were not serious and the defence epidemiologists had
made similar incursions.93 Boundaries developed because of the particular shape
of litigation, the available evidence, tactical decisions made during the trial and
the interpretation and application of rules can substantially influence the shape
and availability of what constitutes evidence in legal settings.94
The second issue also concerns approaches to litigation which again illustrate
some of the inter-relatedness of a number of domains. The other grounds of
appeal provide some additional indication of the extent to which evidence, law
and procedure are inter-related and actively contested and how well resourced
defendants and plaintiffs are relatively free to contest their dispute across all sorts
of legal-(and)-epistemic domains. On appeal, counsel for James Hardie made a
brief submission against the trial judge's initial finding of foreseeability.95 More
fundamentally, other grounds of appeal included questions about the jurisdiction
of the Dust Diseases Tribunal. Seltsam had also referred to the award of damages
and procedural fairness as grounds of appeal. Even the diagnosis of the plaintiff's
illness was contested.96 These ongoing areas of contestation, not all of which
were pursued, were capable of influencing not just the admissible evidence, and
how it might be understood as relevant during the trial as well as its judicial
assessment and the viability of the case but even the appropriate forum for their
consideration.97
Seltsam: The specific contingencies of the case
So far most of the discussion of the evidence and the law — hopefully the
categories will by now appear closely interdependent if not to some extent
mutually constituting — has concentrated on fairly abstract or general legal and
evidentiary issues. Despite the judicial framing, this overview of the law and the
evidence does not appear to be undertaken independently from process(es) of
decision-making and rationalisation. That which is characterised as evidence of
the specific, and the application of the law, appear consistent with the articulated
categories and standards purportedly used to decide the case. However, as we
have argued, these very categories are to varying degrees shaped by both the
development of the law and the specific evidential topographies presented during
the trial and appeal. The ultimate decisions at the trial and appeal depend on the
selective framing of the meaning of the evidence and its application to
strategically articulated legal standards. Now we turn to consider some of the
more case-specific factors — those relating specifically to the plaintiff —
underlying the judicial rationalisations.
In the Seltsam appeal most of the discussion of the scientific and medical
evidence and the application of the law focused on the general causal issues. To
some extent that was a result of the emphasis placed on the epidemiological
record by plaintiffs, defendants and judges. Distinguishing between specific and
general causation, Spigelman CJ referred to McCredie's testimony in support for
the proposition that epidemiologists were ineligible to testify about particular
cases:
Q I think you said earlier, doctor, that your speciality in epidemiology is one looking at statistics and
populations and diseases and that your discipline does not permit you to make a particular diagnosis
for a particular patient.
A That's exactly right.98
Reliance on epidemiological evidence had the potential to cause difficulties
when attention focused on the specific circumstances of the plaintiff's case.
Significantly, both Spigelman CJ and Stein JA acknowledged these potential
limitations although each represented their implications quite differently.
Although Spigelman CJ made no allowance for extrapolations from general
causation to the particulars of the plaintiff's circumstances, preferring to rely on
the strength of the general epidemiological record to determine the case, he did
cite an extract from the United States Federal Judicial Centre's Reference Manual
outlining potential limitations to the application of epidemiological evidence to
individuals:
The discussion above assumes that the only evidence bearing on cause in fact is epidemiological. Such an
assumption is unlikely, and a variety of additional pieces of evidence, although less quantifiable, affect a
fact finder's assessment. Biases in the epidemiological studies might justify a conclusion that the real
magnitude of increase risk is greater or lower than that revealed in the study. The dose to which the
plaintiff was exposed might be greater or lesser than those in the epidemiological study, thereby
requiring some extrapolation. In addition, there might be factors peculiar to the plaintiff — excess
exposure to another known cause, pathological mechanism, family history of disease, or conflict in
diagnoses — that modify any probability based solely on the available epidemiological evidence.99
These were some of the very factors introduced by Stein J A to distinguish
among the epidemiological studies and infuse some with greater evidential and
legal significance. In addition, Stein JA cited the case of Baldwin for authority
(judicial bootstrapping) about the relevance of epidemiological studies to
individual cases and the confounding effects of multiple causes on the value of
epidemiological evidence.
Spigelman CJ made little effort to apply what he portrayed as a convincing
epidemiological record to the plaintiff's circumstances. In the absence of general
causal evidence, the plaintiff's cause was doomed. Accepting the defendants'
representation of the epidemiological evidence as convincing, Spigelman CJ
merely supplemented his assessment with a few case-specific non-
epidemiological factors, operationalised to reinforce the thrust of his
interpretation of the epidemiological evidence and mediate his conversion of
general causation into a finding specific and definitive in relation to the plaintiff's
action. The failure to find asbestos fibres during a fine needle biopsy of the
plaintiff's kidney and the possibility that RCC was caused by obesity, smoking or
some unknown aetiology all weakened the plaintiff's case.
In contrast, Stein JA suggested that the epidemiological evidence was open to
alternative readings strengthened by the plaintiff's lengthy and heavy exposure
to white, but also some blue, asbestos.100 Heavy exposure, an appropriate latency
period, the apparent biological plausibility and animal studies were all combined
to strengthen the epidemiological evidence supporting an association between
asbestos exposure and the plaintiff's RCC.101 Further, Stein JA differentiated
among some of the epidemiological studies, discounting those suggesting no
association where the participants had not, like the plaintiff, experienced
extensive or heavy exposure to asbestos.102 For Stein JA the negative result of the
fine needle biopsy, like the lack of a dose-response relationship, was not
interpreted as determinative.
Seltsam: Responsibility and social policy
Over the last few decades, judicial expressions of legal causation have regularly
included debates around the extent to which judges should make social, moral
and policy assumptions explicit. This was one of the features of the judgments in
the leading Australian case of March v Stramare where a common sense approach
to legal causation and putative commitment to judicial transparency were
endorsed by a majority of the High Court. Acknowledging their sensitivity to a
range of social and policy expedients, judges have repeatedly explained that their
causal deliberations are not directly comparable with those undertaken in the
supposedly epistemologically more pristine realms of science and philosophy.
Such pronouncements tend to achieve a degree of judicial consensus and the
tendency is exemplified in the Seltsam judgments. There, commenting on legal
images of causation, Spigelman CJ explained:
When assessing expert evidence on causation, the legal concept of causation requires the court to
approach the matter in a distinctively different manner from that which may be appropriate in either
philosophy or science, including the science of epidemiology.103
Judges frequently explain differences between law and purportedly more pure
epistemic domains (such as philosophy and the sciences) in terms of the legal
system having a range of constituencies beyond "truth". The legal system is not
concerned exclusively with, nor is it possessed with the opportunity or resources
to reflect upon, refractory epistemological matters. In addition to "truth", the legal
system is sensitive to a range of other, often conflicting, considerations such as
the pragmatic and expeditious resolution of disputes, policy implications, effects
of liability, fairness, public acceptance of verdicts and limited resources. These
types of sentiments were expressed where Spigelman CJ explained that unlike
philosophy or science: "In law, on the other hand, problems of causation arise in
the context of ascertaining or apportioning legal responsibility for a given
occurrence."104
So, the legal assessment and attribution of causation should not be understood
as identical with conclusions derived for or within other contexts. This point has
been developed in our discussion of the Seltsam appeal, where appellate judges
explained that they were not constrained by medical opinions — even consensual
medical opinions.105 Judges are empowered, if such a decision is considered
legally appropriate, to apportion (legal) causation where a physician or scientists
might be tentative or reluctant.106 Significantly, however, all of the judges in the
Seltsam appeal explained their decisions on the basis of particular readings of the
scientific evidence and the application of legal standards. In making and
explaining such attributions, judges are not entirely insulated or sheltered from
exogenous criticism from scientific fields and beyond.
Accepting that judicial representations of causation are not always consistent
with scientific and medical approaches introduces a degree of vulnerability into
legal decision making and rationalisations. This can require the judiciary to
balance and defend a number of disparate legitimatory resources, such as the
ability to recover damages, the valuing of scientific evidence, discouraging some
types of social practices and determining the meaning of legal standards such as
the burden of proof in relation to "uncertainty". Where judges appear to disagree
with consensual scientific opinion, they are exposed to risk of criticism not only
from scientists but also those concerned with specific outcomes and their
implications.107 Of course, accepting that judges are not entirely constrained by
scientific and medical consensus or even expert majorities does not mean that
they will or could readily reject such expert knowledges. Judges must skilfully
manage the appropriation and/or rejection of expert knowledges pertaining to
causation in ways which maintain institutional integrity and legitimacy.108 Even
though Spigelman CJ and Stein JA disagreed about the strength of the expert
evidence and its legal significance they both endeavoured to produce a
comprehensive assessment of that evidence to explain their respective positions.
These judicial perspectives offer some indication of the status of scientific
knowledge and its value as a legitimatory resource. Further, each produced a
discursive formulation where the legal standards and the evidence are
purposefully dove-tailed to support their preferred outcome. The legal standards
were sufficiently flexible to support both readings as well as the decision of
Davies AJA. Even though the decisions of Spigelman CJ and Stein JA are
fundamentally incompatible, both are represented as the necessary combination
of the law and the evidence rather than the rationalised preferences of judges
confronted with degrees of legal and evidentiary indeterminacy or policy
expedients.
Only rarely do judges reject the expert evidence in its entirety. More
commonly, in adversarial settings, the evidence of one side is preferred.
Sometimes that preference is signified by the application of an evidentiary
threshold such as sufficiency or a burden of proof. Alternatively, the preferred
expert evidence — the evidence purportedly underpinning the decision — is
presented using different rhetorical tropes (usually empiricist framing) to the
presentation of the evidence associated with the dispreferred side (usually
contingent framing or a genre of uncertainty).109 Invariably, such decisions
require the strategic (re-)configuration of complex social, procedural and
epistemic considerations.
In concluding the case study, it may be significant that Spigelman CJ indicated
that the Seltsam appeal should be regarded as some kind of test case.110 The
Seltsam case may also be understood as legal authority for the recognition and
use of epidemiological evidence in negligence cases in NSW (and beyond).
Importantly, Spigelman CJ distinguished and rejected some of the more
restrictive United States approaches to the admission and use of epidemiological
evidence. In practice the differences between the United States and New South
Wales approaches might be more illusory than real. Notwithstanding that judges
in Seltsam (Spigelman CJ and Stein JA) and earlier cases had recognised
difficulties associated with the use of epidemiological evidence — particularly in
relation to specific causation and adjusting the evidence to the circumstances of
particular plaintiffs, the role of multiple causes, inconclusive records, the
combination of epidemiological evidence with non-epidemiological evidence and
hierarchising epidemiological postulates — epidemiology was conceived by the
defendants, plaintiffs and judges to be the primary site of the evidential
contest.111 In that way legal expectations pertaining to proof, here in relation to
causation, might be understood to have exerted a fundamentally epistemological
influence. Reliance upon, or more accurately the privileging of, epidemiological
evidence has been a conspicuous feature of toxic tort litigation in Australia but
has been even more prominent in the United States.112
The Seltsam trial and appellate judgments might be conceived as a special case
addressing difficulties associated with evaluating causation evidence in so-called
toxic tort litigation. Earlier, in the same jurisdiction, in another case concerned
with asbestos related illness (mesothelioma) and a range of epidemiological and
non-epidemiological evidence, two appellate judges encouraged parliament to
intervene in the resolution of cases involving extensive submissions of complex
scientific and medical evidence.
This case presents what appears to be the next evolutionary stage in a legal battle between employees
and employers in mesothelioma cases. The Tribunal and this Court were confronted, not so much
between experts of like disciplines but with experts in different disciplines ... There must also be
considerable doubt as to whether the Tribunal should be the arbiter of the medical and scientific
controversies which are fought out in these cases. However, as long as such cases must be brought within
the normative rules of negligence, the Court is required to make findings as to causation on the uncertain
and conflicting medical and scientific evidence which is presented. It is a matter for the Legislature as to
whether this should remain the case.113
These comments provide some sense of a range of extra-legal considerations
where cases are strategically fought and defended over time responding to earlier
victories and defeats.114 Beazley JA's request may signify both the difficulties
involved in deciding and rationalising (closing) such disputes as well as judicial
concern at the institutional vulnerability associated with such decision making,
notwithstanding degrees of legal and evidential indeterminacy and the existence
of a range of devices designed to insulate judicial fact-finding and deflect
external criticism.
Seltsam: Overview
Notwithstanding the respondent's argument about the realised increased risk
from Chappel v Hart or the trial judge's findings in the court below, Spigelman CJ
and Stein JA basically agreed on the legal formulation appropriate to deciding the
case. Both accepted that the possibility of a causal relationship was insufficient,
by itself, to found an action in negligence. They also agreed that, in the absence
of scientific evidence, or, where scientific and medical evidence only suggested
the possibility of a causal relationship, the evidence might still support a finding
of legal causation. They also accepted that the only circumstance preventing
judges from transforming a scientific possibility into a legal probability was when
the relationship had been effectively dismissed by (all) credible scientists or
physicians. Spigelman CJ and Stein JA also agreed, in principle, that all of these
assessments should be made according to common sense. However, as we have
seen, Spigelman CJ and Stein JA did not agree about whether the scientific and
medical evidence constituted a legal probability that asbestos exposure caused or
materially contributed to the plaintiff's cancer. Spigelman CJ effectively decided
the issue on the basis of general causation. In contrast, Stein JA indicated that the
evidence was sufficient to support a finding of legal causation. We are not told,
however, whether that threshold was achieved on the basis of the strength of the
scientific and medical evidence or whether Stein JA elevated a scientific
possibility and made it the basis for a finding of a legally significant causal
relationship. Drawing attention to the process of judicial elevation — interpreting
the scientific record to demonstrate a probable relationship between asbestos
exposure and RCC — might have weakened the persuasiveness of Stein JA's
judgment notwithstanding the legal commitment to a common sense approach.
In contrast, Spigelman CJ explicitly aligned his judgment with what was
characterised as the current scientific orthodoxy. Any association between
asbestos exposure and RCC never rose above a scientific or legal possibility.
A supplementary issue relates to the use of uncertainty and the burden of
proof. We can imagine commentators criticising the foregoing discussion on the
basis that knowledge about the cause of RCC, both specific and general, is limited
and so the legal system is beset or constrained by scientific and medical
uncertainties. Our response would be that the use of uncertainty, like the more
fashionable concept transscience,115 does little to assist our understanding of the
judicial uses of scientific evidence or to assist judges confronted with complex
causal questions.116 Judges, legal traditions, procedures and rules, case
preparation and strategic configurations of evidence interact to influence what
can be represented as (un)certain. In the absence of a range of possible
legaltechnical impediments — such as statutes of limitation or admissibility
standards — that may determine the outcome of a case, judges ultimately have to
decide whether an evidential record is sufficiently certain or uncertain (or trans-
scientific) to meet a legal threshold of proof, however indeterminate. Recognising
disagreement, questions of judgment, experience and interpretation in an area of
uncertainty did not prevent Stein JA finding a causal relationship between
asbestos exposure and the plaintiff's cancer on the balance of probability.117 The
use of certainty, like appeals to the weight (or consistency) of the scientific
evidence and the possibility of judicial translation of scientific possibilities into
legal probabilities, reveals little about how law, evidence and a range of social
and policy concerns are combined to produce specific outcomes, or how these
outcomes are connected to broader social concerns and legal developments.
Conclusion: Minding the Gap(s)
Most directly, our assessment of the relationship between causation among the
sciences and causation in legal settings would seem to caution against simplistic
or textbook-style definitions, comparisons and recriminations. In the foregoing
discussion we have emphasised an alternative approach, where judges, in a sense,
strategically construct images of scientific and legal causation drawing from a
variety of epistemic domains, policy considerations and practical contingencies.
We also identified how the apportioning of responsibility, social and policy
implications, and the specific details of the case were important to understanding
the legal constructions produced in legal settings and judgments. These
perspectives, and the call for a less philosophically orientated approach to
exploring the complex and variable relations between scientific, medical and legal
causation, were illustrated through the provision of a tentative framework and a
case study.
Acknowledging that policy has not been the main focus of this chapter, our
analysis does suggest some abstract yet rather interesting possibilities. First,
following our outline of the multi-dimensional and epistemologically
promiscuous nature of causal determinations, it could be suggested that attempts
at regulation or reform of the ways in which issues of scientific and medical
causation are addressed in courts would be advised to avoid reductionist or uni-
dimensional approaches. Attempting to highlight or isolate any one hypothesised
variable — such as expert witnesses, the scientific illiteracy of the judiciary and
jury or limitations inherent to the adversarial system — as a recalcitrant source of
law-science (here causal) difficulties, concedes too much ground to the ideal
categories used to frame judicial decisions and their rationalisations without
actually explaining how such decisions may have been produced.
Efforts at initiating change should probably be more systemic, working beyond
the representations made by judges and expert witnesses, and actually influence
their ability to manipulate the legal and scientific resources available, as well as
influencing the relationship between expert witnesses and the court, and public
expectations of the legal system. The multi-dimensional and epistemologically
impure nature of legal determinations and representations of causation seem to
have some tacit, or what might be better described as subliminal, acceptance in
the evolution of various legislative initiatives such as the development of strict
liability and compulsory insurance schemes. To varying degrees, these schemes
internalise or displace some of the processes involved in aligning the rhetorics of
law, medicine and science through the institutional provision of processes and
interpretations which operate in a manner consistent with epistemic putty, able to
be disguised with the paint of public policy. Even though such mechanisms may
offer procedural advantages and appear tidy in operation, it is worth considering
that contradictory epistemic glosses, judicial disagreement, the multifaceted
nature and policy challenges associated with more traditional approaches to
determining legal causation, continue to offer social value through their potential
to allow some of the social processes and contingent judgments involved in the
creation and dissemination of scientific/medical and legal images of causation to
achieve, admittedly quite limited, visibility and public accountability.
* Gary Edmond, School of Law, Adelaide University. David Mercer, Senior Lecturer in the Science and
Technology Studies Program at the University of Wollongong. The authors thank John Keeler for his
comments on a draft of this chapter.
1 HT Engelhardt, "Relevant Causes: Their Designation in Medicine and Law" in S Spicker, J Healey & H
Engelhardt (eds), The Law Medicine Relation: A Philosophical Exploration, D Reidel Publishing
Company, Dordrecht, 1981, at pl23; T Halper, "Time, Law and Responsibility: Additional Thoughts on
Causality" in S Spicker, J Healey & H Engelhardt (eds), The Law Medicine Relation: A Philosophical
Exploration, D Reidel Publishing Company, Dordrecht, 1981, at p129.
2 R Proctor, Cancer Wars: How Politics Shapes What We Know and Don't Know About Cancer, Basic
Books, New York, 1995, at p257.
3 Ibid.
4 For an overview and introduction to some of the literature consider B Easlea, Witchhunting, Magic and
the New Philosophy: An Introduction to the Debates of the Scientific Revolution 1450-1750, Harvester
Press, Brighton, 1980.
5 T Kuhn, "Concepts of Cause in the Development of Physics" in T Kuhn, The Essential Tension, Chicago
University Press, Chicago, 1977, pp21, 29-30. See also B Barnes, "Belief Action and Determinism: the
Causal Explanation of Scientific Change" in
B Barnes, Scientific Knowledge and Sociological Theory, Routledge and Kegan Paul, London, 1974, pp71-
4: "The background of normality forms the set of unchanged necessary conditions against which the
causal story stands out and operates as an intelligible communication the cause is a necessary
condition in which we are interested; in labelling it, we define a taken for granted background of
normality in terms of which our utterance makes sense ... in science it is a crucial function of
theoretical entities that they are invoked as causes, to explain events or phenomena."
6 T Geiryn, Cultural Boundaries of Science: Credibility on the Line, Chicago University Press, Chicago,
1998; G Edmond, "Science in Court; Negotiating the Meaning of a 'Scientific' Experiment during a
Murder Trial and Some Limits to Legal Deconstruction for the Public Understanding of Law and
Science" (1998) 20 Sydney Law Review 361.
7 G Edmond, "Deflating Daubert: Kumho Tire Co v Carmichael and the inevitability of general
acceptance (Frye)" (2000) 23 University of New South Wales Law Journal 31.
8 R Smith & B Wynne (eds), Expert Evidence: Interpreting Science in the Law, Routledge, London, 1989; S
Jasanoff, Science at the Bar: Law, Science and Technology in America, Harvard University Press,
Cambridge, 1995.
9 H Hart & T Honoré, Causation in the Law, 2nd edn, Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1985.
10 See below.
11 See beiow. P Huber, Galileo's Revenge: Keeping Junk Science out of the Courtroom, Basic Books, New
York, 1991,
12 Smith & Wynne, op cit, n8; G Edmond & D Mercer, "Trashing 'Junk' Science" {1998) Stanford
Technology Law Review <http://stanford.edu/STLR/Articles/Index.htm>.
13 S Hilgartner, "The Dominant View of Popularisation: Conceptual Problems, Political Uses" (1990) 20
Social Studies of Science 519; G Edmond & D Mercer, "Scientific Literacy and the Jury: Reconsidering
Jury Competence" (1997) 6 Public Understanding of Science 329.
14 See below. With respect to expert panels, compare S Jasanoff, "Expert Games in Silicon Gel Breast
Implant Litigation" in M Freeman & H Reece (eds), Science in Court, Dartmouth, Aldershot, 1998, at
p83 and L Walker & J Monahan, "Scientific Authority: The Breast Implant Litigation and Beyond"
(2000) 86 Virginia Law Review 801. In relation to court-appointed experts see G Edmond, "Judicial
Representations of
Scientific Evidence" (2000) 63 Modern Law Review 216 at 241-50: I Freckelton & H Selby, Expert Evidence,
Law Book Co, Sydney, 1993-...; I Freckelton, The Trial of the Expert, Oxford University Press,
Melbourne, 2002 (forthcoming).
15 M Green, Bendectin and Birth Defects, University of Pennsylvania Press, Philadelphia, 1996; J Sanders.
Bendectin on Trial: A Study of Mass Tort Litigation, University of Michigan Press, 1998. An example
of an appellate court, early in the Bendectin litigation cycle, recognising and attributing weight to the
non-epidemiological evidence is provided by DC Court of Appeal in Oxendine v Merrell Dow
Pharmaceuticals, Inc, 506 A 2d 1100 at 1104 (1986). This case was reversed in the mid 1990s according
to what was then described as the weight of the evidence supporting the safety of Bendectin
rendering the plaintiff's evidence inadmissible, in Oxendine v Merrell Dow Pharmaceuticals, Inc, No
82-1245, 1996 WL 680992 (DC Super 1996). That determination was inseparable from the emergent
judicial consensus about the legal implications of Bendectin consumption.
16 857 F 2d 823 at 830. Here epidemiological evidence is used as if it precluded the insights produced in or
among other scientific domains, compare the approach discussed in note 54, below.
17 G Edmond & D Mercer, "Litigation Life: Law-science Knowledge Construction in (Bendectin) Mass
Toxic Tort Litigation" (2000) 30 Social Studies of Science 265.
18 113 S Ct 2786 (1993).
19 The US Supreme Court referred to the work of philosophers Popper and Hempel and the sociologist
Jasanoff in their discussion of the nature of science in the Daubert decision.
20 K Foster & P Huber, Judging Science: Scientific Knowledge and the Federal Courts, MIT Press,
Cambridge, 1998, but compare G Edmond & D Mercer, "Juggling Science: From Polemic to Pastiche"
(1999) 13 Social Epistemology 215; M Berger, "Eliminating General Causation: Notes Toward a New
Theory of Justice and Toxic Torts" (1997) 97 Columbia Law Review 2117.
21 An example is provided by Beazley JA's brief comments in the mesothelioma case of EM Baldwin & Son
Pty Ltd v Plane; Jsekarb Pty Ltd v Plane (1999) Aust Tort Reports 81-499 at 65,622. Endeavouring to
distinguish her earlier decision in Bendix Mintex Pty Ltd v Barnes (1997) 42 NSWLR 307, Beazley JA
agreed with Fitzgerald AJA's proposition that: "differences of opinion which emerge in those cases:
are, for the most part, less related to questions of principle and more attributable to conflicting views
of the primary facts, and in some instances at least, the conclusions to be drawn from expert
evidence.' This case is different from Bendix and Walsh because in this case there was medical
evidence which supported the respondent's case. Thus my agreement with Fitzgerald AJA."
22 U Beck. Reflexive Modernization: Politics, Tradition and Aesthetics in the Modern Social Order, Polity,
Cambridge, 1994.
23 For a discussion of some of the limitations of Beck's thesis see, B Barnes, The Elements of Social Theory,
UCL Press, London, 1995, at ppl09-ll.
24 T Ward, "Law's Truth, Lay Truth and Medical Science: Three Case Studies" in H Reece (ed), Law and
Science: Current Legal Issues, vol 1, Oxford University Press, Oxford, 1998, at p263; Biogen Inc v
Medeva plc [1997] RPC 1 at 45.
25 See below.
26 H Reece, "Pedro Juan Cubillo v Commonwealth of Australia: Right Result, Wrong Method" in H Reece
(ed), Law and Science: Current Legal Issues, vol 1, Oxford University Press, Oxford, 1998, at pp 81, 95.
27 Birkholz v Gilbertson Pty Ltd [1985] 38 SASR 121 at 130 per King CJ.
28 J Holder & S Elworthy, "The BSE Crisis" in H Reece (ed), Law and Science: Current Legal Issues, vol 1,
Oxford University Press, Oxford, 1998, p145.
29 S Rudavsky, "Separating Spheres: Legal Ideology v Paternity Testing in Divorce Cases" (1999) 12 Science
in Context 123 at 131.
30 Commonwealth ex rel Ivory Weston v John Weston, 193 A 2d 782 at 783 (1963).
31 J Sanders, "The Bendectin Litigation: A Case Study in Life Cycles of Mass Torts" (1992) 43 Hastings Law
Journal 301.
32 Edmond & Mercer, 2000, op cit, nl7.
33 Richardson by Richardson v Richardson-Merrell, Inc, 857 F 2d 823 at 831 (DC Cir 1988).
34 Further examples are considered below.
35 [2000] NSWCA 29; see I Freckelton, "Epidemiology Evidence" (2000) 8 Journal of Law and Medicine 133;
C Miller, "Coal Dust, Causation and Common Sense" (2000) 63 Modern Law Review 763.
36 Seltsam, at [270],
37 At [191].
38 At [192], [259].
39 At [259]-[263],
40 At [24], [26], [161], [162], [254],
41 At [19], [189], [265].
42 Consider M Lynch & S Jasanoff (eds), "Contested Identities: Science, Law and Forensic Practice" (1998)
28 Social Studies of Science 675; S Fuchs & S Ward, "What is Deconstruction, and Where and When
Does it Take Place? Making Facts in Science, Building Cases in Law" (1994) 59 American Sociological
Review 481; Smith & Wynne, op cit, n8; Jasanoff, 1995, op cit, n8.
43 Consider S Fish, Doing What Comes Naturally: Change, Rhetoric and the Practice of Theory in Literary
and Legal Studies, Duke University Press, Durham, 1989.
44 Seltsam, at [81], [201], [269].
45 March v E & M H Stramare Pty Ltd (1991) 171 CLR 506. Appeals to common sense, even in the
evaluation of scientific evidence, resonates with Rehnquist CJ's dissent in the Daubert v Merrell Dow
Pharmaceuticals, Inc, 509 US 579 at 600-1 (1993), where he dismisses the suggestion that judges
should be called upon to become amateur scientists.
46 A Irwin & B Wynne (eds), Misunderstanding Science: the Public Reconstruction of Science and
Technology, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1995; G Edmond & D Mercer, "What Judges
Should Know about Falsification" (1997) 5 Expert Evidence 29.
47 Seltsam, at [78]-[120]; see also Stein J at [201] agreeing with Spigelman CJ.
48 At [96].
49 At [94].
50 At [93]. Both statements, approved by Spigelman CJ, are drawn from the case of EMI (Australia) Ltd v
Bes [1970] 2 NSWR 238 at 242.
51 Seltsam, at [250].
52 Chappel v Hart (1998) 195 CLR 232.
53 Seltsam, at [203].
54 At [107]-[109],
55 At [201],
56 (1999) 73 ALJR 782.
57 [1973] 1 WLR 1.
58 Seltsam, at [105]-[120],
59 Bendix Mintex Pty Ltd v Barnes (1997) 42 NSWLR 307. Spigelman CJ acknowledged that in Bendix there
had been some division over whether an increased risk was capable of causing or materially
contributing to an injury on the balance of probabilities. He contrasted the positions of Mason P and
Beazley J A.
60 Seltsam, at [119].
61 Edmond & Mercer, "Trashing 'Junk' Science", 1998, op cit, n12.
62 Seltsam, at [35].
63 At [39].
64 At [48].
65 At [50].
66 At [54].
67 At [53].
68 At [58].
69 At [236], [249]. D Rier, "The Versatile Caveat Section of an Epidemiological Paper: Managing Public
and Private Risk" (1999) 21 Science Communication 3.
70 Seltsam, at [248].
71 The foundational argument, in the sociology of scientific knowledge, for the value of avoiding
sociologies of error — that is, seeking more general sociological explanations for the generation of all
beliefs whether characterised as "right" or "wrong" rather than focusing disproportionate sociological
attention on sources of deviance in the production of error or pathological knowledge — see D Bloor,
Knowledge and Social Imagery, 2nd edn, University of Chicago Press, Chicago, 1991.
72 This is not to suggest that processes of selection, application and interpretation could be avoided by
other institutional or procedural arrangements, although it may displace some of them into a less
visible "background".
73 D Kennedy, "Freedom and Constraint in Adjudication: a Critical Phenomenology" (1986) 36 Journal of
Legal Education 518.
74 Seltsam, at [29], [31].
75 "Dose Response Effect. If the risk of the disease rises with increasing exposure, a causal interpretation of
the association is more plausible ..." (at [139]).
76 Seltsam, at [137], [175]. "Most epidemiological studies identify the strength of an association by a
measure called relative risk (RR). RR is defined as the ratio of the incidence of disease in exposed
individuals compared to the incidence in unexposed individuals. If the relative risk equals 1.0, the risk
in exposed individuals is the same as the risk in unexposed individuals. If the relative risk is greater
than 1.0 the risk in exposed individuals is greater than the risk in unexposed individuals." (at [67]).
77 At [29],[31],[32],[178].
78 At [250].
79 All of the experts accepted that cohort studies were the most reliable (#51, 221, 240).
80 Seltsam, at [199].
81 At [215], [285] and [71].
82 At [240].
83 At [229],
84 At [243]-[247],
85 At [228], [242],
86 The issue of "science for litigation" was discussed in one of the US judgments referred to (though
incorrectly cited) by Spigelman CJ, the case of Daubert on remand: Daubert v Merrell Dow
Pharmaceuticals, Inc, 43 F3d 1311 (9th Cir 1995). For a critical appraisal consider Edmond, 2000, op
cit, n7.
87 Seltsam, at [221], [227], [246].
88 At [221].
89 At [254].
90 At [209].
91 At [251].
92 Evidence Act 1995 (NSW) s79: "If a person has specialised knowledge based on the person's training,
study or experience, the opinion rule does not apply to evidence of an opinion of that person that is
wholly or substantially based on that knowledge."
93 Seltsam, at [148]-[150], [255]-[258]. McLaughlin testified unequivocally that asbestos exposure "did not
contribute to Mr McGuiness' renal cell cancer" (at [225]). Notably this representation appears in the
judgment of Stein JA and not the judgment of Spigelman CJ. How it should be reconciled with
Spigelman CJ's reference to McCredie's admission that epidemiologists were not competent to testify
about individual cases and why he chose to cite the statement of McCredie (see text accompanying
note 53) rather than McLaughlin seems consistent with the representations of the evidence and the
standing of the scientists the judges were each endeavouring to establish.
94 Geiryn, op cit, n6; Edmond, 1998, op cit, n6.
95 Foreseeability was more actively contested in some of the earlier asbestos litigation such as the appeal
in Bendix. Once judges had decided the issue of foreseeable in favour of plaintiff's some of the
contestation became more sharply focused around causation.
96 Seltsam, at [193].
97 Some of the contests could be won procedurally. For a discussion of techniques employed in some of
the earlier tobacco litigation, see R Rabin, "A Sociolegal History of the Tobacco Tort Litigation" (1992)
44 Stanford Law Review 853.
98 Seltsam, at [37], Having decided that this type of incursion, an epidemiologist testifying about an
individual case, did not render the testimony inadmissible under s79 of the Evidence Act 1995 (NSW),
Spigelman CJ nevertheless uses the very breach to support his position, particularly the purported
strength of the epidemiological record in relation to general causation.
99 Seltsam, at [122].
100 At [254].
101 At [206], [254].
102 At [239], compare Spigelman CJ at [179], [180].
103 At [142], see also [202], [208].
104 At [202], citing March v Stramare and Chappel v Hart.
105 Despite the suggestion that judges were not empowered to accept expert evidence of a causal
association that was explicitly excluded as a possibility by a field or fields, in practice this standard is
always susceptible to manipulation. In the much earlier traumatic cancer case of Commissioner for
Transport v Adamcik (1961) 106 CLR 292, a majority of the High Court recognised, as legally
sufficient, the opinion of a single expert, even though he (and others) accepted that it was
inconsistent with virtually all contemporary medical knowledge. The expert even described himself
as somewhat of a visionary. For a critical response consider the dissent of Windeyer J.
106 Seltsam, at [144].
107 Such as insurance companies, manufacturers, pharmaceutical companies, certain professions as well as
plaintiff and defence lawyers. Judicial differences over the value of scientific evidence have been a
conspicuous feature of some high profile miscarriage of justice cases.
108 B Wynne. Rationality and Ritual: The Windscale Inquiry and Nuclear Decisions in Britain, British
Society of the History of Science, Chalfont St Giles, 1982.
109 N Gilbert & M Mulkay, Opening Pandora's Box: A Sociological Analysis of Scientist's Discourse,
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1984, at pp56-7.
110 Seltsam, at [185].
111 At [232], The privileging of epidemiological studies dates has been a feature of a number of mass torts,
including the prominent Agent Orange litigation: In re Agent Orange Product Liability Litigation, 597
F Supp 740 (DC NY 1984); In re Agent Orange Product Liability Litigation, 611 F Supp 1221 (DC NY
1985); In re Agent Orange Product Liability Litigation, 818 F 2d 145 (2nd Cir 1987). For some
discussion of that litigation see P Schuck, Agent Orange on Trial: Mass Toxic Disasters in the Courts,
Harvard University Press, Cambridge, 1986.
112 Edmond & Mercer, 2000, op cit, nl7.
113 EM Baldwin & Son Pty Ltd v Plane; Jsekarb Pty Ltd v Plane (1999) Aust Tort Reports 81-499 at 65,623 per
Beazley JA and 65,650 per Fitzgerald AJA. Judicial "unease" with cases such as Baldwin and Seltsam
has received media coverage. A series of articles about the Seltsam case were featured in The Sydney
Morning Herald, see W Bacon, "Experts on Trial" (5 July 2000) 1 and (6 July 2000) 11.
114 Sanders, 1992, op cit, n31.
115 A Weinberg, "Science and Trans-science" (1972) 10 Minerva 209; W Wagner, "Transscience in Toxic
Torts" (1986) 96 Yale Law Journal 428; W Wagner, "The Science Charade in Toxic Risk Regulation"
(1995) 95 Columbia Law Review 1613; S Jasanoff, "Contested Boundaries in Policy-Relevant Science"
(1987) 17 Social Studies of Science 195.
116 B Campbell, "Uncertainty as Symbolic Action in Disputes among Experts" (1985) 15 Social Studies of
Science 429; S Shackley & B Wynne, "Representing Uncertainty in Global Climate Change Science
and Policy: Boundary-ordering Devices and Authority" (1996) 21 Science, Technology and Human
Values 275.
117 Seltsam, at [253].