Part B:
The Concept of Justice and Causal
Responsibility in Tort Law
6 Legal Rules Governing the
Requirement of Causation in Tort Law
IAN CALLINAN*
It is not without significance that philosophy and science each attempt
explanations of cause and effect. A body of scientists now subscribe to chaos
theory. I sometimes think that that theory may have relevance to the legal theory
of causation. The theory, as I understand it, is essentially that normal actions are
not always productive of predictable consequences: they can cause random
results. A mathematician wrote a book called Does God Play Dice? The
Mathematics of Chaos. The most trivial of events he theorised, might, in
combination with other trivial causes, contribute to major catastrophes – the
butterfly wings theory. He wrote:1
The flapping of a single butterfly's wing today produces a tiny change in the state of the atmosphere.
Over a period of time, what the atmosphere actually does diverges from what it would have done. So, in
a month's time, a tornado that would have devastated the Indonesian coast doesn't happen. Or maybe
one that wasn't going to happen, does.
I will not dwell on the theoretical notions underpinning the requirement of
causation. That is the task of others. I will merely focus on the legal rules, which
are, in the end, those set by the court of which I am a member.
However, any discussion about the legal rules governing causation in tort
would be incomplete without some reference to the piecemeal development of the
law of negligence. It is open to question whether there is any underlying,
universal principle. Each category of tort has a different history. Just as it is said
of Roman Law, that to use the word "contract" is misleading for suggesting
greater unity in the law than actually existed, to use the term "tort" may be
similarly misleading.2
Developing in an unprincipled way, as actions on the case, torts were not
underpinned by broader legal principles, as, for example occurred in other areas
of the law, such as real and personal property. An example which springs to mind
is the recent case of Perre v Apand Pty Ltd,3 a case about pure economic loss
which provoked an immediate critical response in an article in the Australian
Law Journal by Justice Pincus of the Court of Appeal of Queensland.4
Until Caltex Oil (Australia) Pty Ltd v The Dredge "Willemstad",5 negligent
cause leading to pure economic loss, although accepted as apparently falling
within such principles as had evolved, was on policy grounds excluded as an
enforceable cause of action. Caltex was the ground-breaking Australian case in
this field. It has still not attracted the support of the House of Lords or the Privy
Council.6 In Perre, most Justices agreed that the appellants in that case could
recover for losses which were purely economic. Seven separate judgments were
published, none of which formulated the tests in exactly the same way, but all of
which subscribed to a number of identical or similar themes.7
The High Court is, I can say, in my brief experience of it, not insensitive to the
need for bright lines of demarcation and clear principle so that judges may apply,
and the law schools may teach, the law with confidence. But a strength of the
common law is that it does not seek to impose an inflexible principle when and
before it is possible to do so: it acknowledges the need for building blocks of
principle over time. This inherent common law protection should ensure that by
the time a principle is articulated, its bases have been applied to a range of
different factual circumstances throughout the country and throughout the
common law world. I said in Perre:8
[I]t must be accepted that this is an area of the law in which the courts should move incrementally and
very cautiously indeed. It is not yet possible to identify a bright line of demarcation between those cases
of pure economic loss in which damages are recoverable and those in which they are not. The law is still
developing in the somewhat piecemeal fashion that Stephen J predicted in Caltex:9
"As the body of precedent accumulates some general area of demarcation between what is and is not a
sufficient degree of proximity in any particular class of case of pure economic loss will no doubt emerge;
but its emergence neither can be, nor should it be, other than as a reflection of the piecemeal conclusions
arrived at in precedent cases."
People ought not be too ready to criticise final courts for adopting an
evolutionary or incremental approach to causation because difficult problems not
surprisingly sometimes provoke difficult solutions. The test of causation
expressed in the very early cases, of "immediacy" and "remoteness" were
deceptively simple and involved, in any event, value judgments.10 Those tests are
no less arbitrary than those presently applied. The very early cases, of course,
were based not on negligence, but on an act causing damage. They were simple
tests, "whether the person slain was nearer to death or further from life":11 not
much of a value judgment in that, but certainly more extensive liability. A man
was said to act at his peril. Tests of that kind make our current problems seem
small in comparison.
Causation, and especially causation in medical negligence cases, has been
described as one of the most difficult tasks that the courts must undertake. There
is little doubt that it has emerged as one of the most controversial and
problematic in expression and application. But why is this problem exciting so
much interest now? Causation is not a new doctrine. The concept of causation
pre-dates negligence.
One complicating factor is technological development. Theorists and
philosophers have said that technology causes us to reconsider long-accepted
notions: technology solves problems, but also creates new ones.12 Although I
think this is often overstated, it has an element of truth to it in the case of
causation. Perhaps medical care is the field in which this is most evident. The
philosopher Mesthene points to two relevant factors: first, the availability of
treatments not before possible; and, secondly, delivery of medical care to the
population at large as a matter of right, not privilege.13
Palliative care may provide a good example to illustrate this. Technology gives
us a greater ability to control life, pain and death. With that enhanced ability
comes the need to negotiate more difficult issues. As human endeavour breaks
further boundaries, courts will be presented with new circumstances and choices
of policy. Technology is important to causation because the more we can create,
do, control and affect, the more we are able to "cause". I will return briefly to
palliative care later. Professor Ashby's contribution to this book deals with that
topic from a medical perspective.14
It was in the case of March v Stramare (E & MH) Pty Ltd15 that the High Court
rejected the so-called "but for" test as the exclusive test of factual causation.
Instead, the but for test was to be accompanied or perhaps even superseded by a
test of common sense principles. A passage from the judgment of Mason CJ is
often cited to explain the logic of applying a test of common sense. The Chief
Justice said:16
In philosophy and science, the concept of causation has been developed in the context of explaining
phenomena by reference to the relationship between conditions and occurrences.
In law, Mason CJ said, problems arise in the context of apportioning legal
responsibility.17 Therefore, the test becomes whether a particular act or omission
can fairly and properly be considered a cause of the accident.18 The implication of
March is, in one sense, clear. Establishing causation in a but for sense is not
sufficient to establish causation generally.
This reminds me of a parody of causation which appeared in the New Yorker
in 1998. It went something like this:19
Your dog ate my philodendron which depressed my mother who in a stupor voted for Marion Barry
causing an upswing in crack sales that allowed Peru to maintain an embassy and accumulate parking
tickets, encouraging me to stay a meter maid rather than become an Imagineer.
I accept that may be an overstatement of the "but for" test.
March may be the bridge between two conflicting views. The first was that
satisfaction of the "but-for" test exhausts the causation issue, with policy
considerations being considered at a different stage of the enquiry. The second
view which, I should say, has prevailed, is that the but for test, will not of itself,
usually be enough to make an act or omission a cause of damage for legal
purposes.
The current generation of judges is certainly not the first to grapple with the
problem of causation. The common sense test must be distinguished from the last
clear chance rule which is said to have been formulated in Davies v Mann.20 The
test was that if both parties were negligent, but if one had a last clear chance of
avoiding the harm, that person would be solely responsible for the harm. That
rule has been trenchantly criticised, not only for being an inept way of giving
effect to sensible policy, but also for masquerading as a common sense test and an
excuse for throwing the whole blame on the defendant. The rule was abolished
with the introduction of apportionment statutes.21
The High Court recently applied,22 but with heavy qualification, the "but-for"
test in the context of the Trade Practices Act 1974 (Cth) which provided for an
examination of whether the applicant suffered damage by the conduct of the
respondent. The provisions of the statute were held to require the identification
of a causal link between loss or damage and conduct done in contravention of the
Act. The Court noted the problems with the "but-for" test in March v Stramare23
but preferred to resolve the case by comparing the position of the plaintiff with
the position that the party would have been in but for the contravening conduct.
On the facts of the case, it was held that no loss had been suffered as a result of
the misleading conduct.
It is in the field of medicine, however, that causation poses special problems. I
hardly need say, as Justice Kirby recently said, that causation, in the context of
establishing a causal connection between medical negligence and damage, is
often the most difficult task for a plaintiff in medical malpractice litigation.
Fleming describes causation as "plaguing" the courts and scholars.24 But courts do
not even agree on that. Justice Gaudron, in Naxakis v Western General
Hospital,25 thought there was a tendency to exaggerate the difficulties associated
with the proof of causation.
While the process is difficult and we have undoubtedly much further to go in
arriving at a clear solution, the broad tension can be simply stated. Not all causes
of damage should give rise to legal liability. Put simply, at what stage does cause
become blame? What are the right rules to apply to limit legal liability
appropriately?
By the time Chappel v Hart26 came to be decided, the proponents of the stand-
alone "but-for" test knew that the law had changed. The case was argued in the
High Court on the basis of a lack of causal connection between the patient's
injury and the doctor's conduct. It was argued as a loss of chance case. Loss of
chance is now a well-settled basis for recovery in contract.27 Its emergence as a
basis for damages in tort28 has occurred later. In Naxakis Gaudron J observed that
the loss of chance approach is distinct from the "all or nothing approach involved
in allowing damages for the actual harm suffered".29 That feature of the doctrine
has made it attractive to academics, some of whom are of the view that it also
alleviates problems associated with causation,30 especially, as Jansen observes,
where there is "uncertain partial causation". Although the view that the
difficulties associated with proof of causation may simply re-appear as difficulties
in establishing the value of the chance in question must be taken into account,31 I
think, tentatively I might say, that the approach of looking to just what damage
was caused by the tort, rather than an "all or nothing" approach may have some
attractions.
There are still, however, many differences of opinion to be overcome with
respect to loss of chance. There is judicial authority to suggest it is simply a
matter to be taken into account in assessing damages32 and that loss of chance
does not apply where the plaintiff sustains physical injury.33 Many of the views
are contradictory.
The second point I wish to make in relation to Chappel v Hart is this. I would
not be overstating the position to say, perhaps not surprisingly, that Chappel v
Hart has been trenchantly criticised and not dispassionately, by medical
practitioners. They point to the inherent unpredictability of the human body, of
tissue and of risks of infections.
There may be a tendency for lawyers to believe that all is controllable; that
scientific development has replaced biological uncertainty.
If the courts apply a "plain person's" test of causation, then there are several
very significant factors which must be considered when determining the extent
to which legal responsibility will attach to tortious conduct.
The community generally has high expectations of professionals who hold
themselves out as highly skilled, charge accordingly and have in part at least,
been expensively educated by public subsidy. But it may now be another question
whether public expectations may be tending to overreach the capacity (or indeed
the public interest of the community) to match them. When the law of negligence
started to assume its modern shape in 1932, concern soon mounted over the
liability that manufacturers, and others in the community, might incur as a result
of what they regarded as no more than mere mischance. There was always going
to be a need for some kind of balancing exercise to ensure that a true victim was
properly compensated, but that any burden upon the community to discharge
liability, whether by increased insurance charges or higher prices for
commodities and services, would not be intolerable.
In Esanda Finance Corporation Ltd v Peat Marwick Hungerfords,34 McHugh J
considered the importance of the willingness and ability of people to undertake
the essential work of auditing, without the fear of being confronted by enormous
claims for damages by people of whom they might be unaware. His Honour
warned against the costs to society of too expansive a view of liability:35
... it is likely that the public will have to pay, directly or indirectly, for the risk of those [economic] losses.
His Honour then went on to quote with approval Professor Siliciano:36
Both potential loss spreaders – the accountant and the third party – can expend resources to minimise
the losses incurred; the accountant can attempt to audit more thoroughly, while the third party can audit
the client independently or bear the investment risks. Both actors can theoretically pass on such costs,
plus any residual losses, to the public: the accountant, through increases in the cost of its services; and
the third party, through increases in the costs of its credit. Either way, the increased costs initially are
imposed on the client class, which in turn passes it on to the public in the form of price increases.
McHugh J added:37
From the public's point of view, therefore, the primary question is, who is the more efficient absorber of
the losses?
It is true that medical practitioners are paying very high insurance premiums.
It is also true that some insurers have withdrawn from the market. It is worrying,
as Mendelson has observed, that there is a perception that the law is imposing
standards that are impossible to attain.38
These are no more than considerations which must be taken into account as
the rules of causation are fashioned.
Causation in the criminal context arose for consideration in the recent case of
Osland v R.39 Since Royall v R,40 there has been discussion of which of the various
tests that were applied in that case would be adopted by the Australian High
Court in future cases. In Osland the deceased had been drugged and then beaten
to death. A mother and her son were the accused. They had jointly selected the
weapon, the mother had drugged the deceased, and then the son beat him to
death. The mother held the deceased down, either while he was being struck, or
immediately after the blows had been administered. These acts were in pursuance
of a preconceived plan.
A majority of the court found that the mother was causally responsible as a
principal for the death. The test preferred by McHugh J in Royall was applied,
that is, whether the act or omission was "sufficiently significant", or the operating
and substantial cause test. There was a difference, however, in the result that was
reached on the application of the test. It does not mean that the other tests have
been rendered inapplicable; they may still be applicable in appropriate
circumstances.
Royall and Osland highlight the fact that there is nothing novel in courts
disagreeing from time to time about the applicable test and its application.
On the horizon there may be looming problems, particularly with respect to,
but perhaps not confined to medical cases, with respect to the proper measure of
damages. I said earlier that in Naxakis Justice Gaudron referred to loss of chance
as one method of avoiding the "all or nothing approach involved in allowing
damage for the actual harm suffered".41 It should be remembered, however, that
loss of chance will not always work to the advantage of the plaintiff. I said in
Naxakis that there is room for the operation of the loss of chance rule:42
If the chance that has been lost is a 51 per cent or greater chance, why should not the plaintiff be taken to
have proved his or her case on the balance of probabilities? I think that in such a situation, the plaintiff
has, and should recover his or her damages in full. Rogers v Whitaker43 is, in one sense, such a case. The
Court there accepted on the balance of probabilities, that the plaintiff would not have had the operation
to which she submitted, and which caused the problems for her that it did, if she had been warned of the
risk that the Court thought material there. Perhaps the plaintiff's damages there might have been
reduced, and indeed significantly so, if what had been established there, was that she might not have
had, as opposed to, would not have had the operation.
On the other hand, in other cases, there is a risk, it might be said, that in almost every instance there is a
lost chance of some kind, perhaps even a 1 per cent or 5 per cent chance, and on that basis every plaintiff
will succeed to some extent. The answer to this must be that the loss of a remote, or very slight chance
should not attract an award of damages. The chance lost must be a real one and of some substance, even
though less than a 50 per cent chance. In the practice of medicine, usually a definite, successful result will
not be able to be guaranteed. Just as the practitioner should not suffer on that account, nor should the
plaintiff, who is precluded from saying what the outcome would have been had the procedure or
treatment not performed been performed, for the very reason that it has not been performed.
I might tentatively suggest that some of the problems might be resolved if the
necessity to keep the issues distinct is kept in mind, and the issues discretely
treated. The first inquiry is did the act or omission cause non-minimal damage?44
If that question is affirmatively answered, the plaintiff has a cause of action in
negligence and the case can move to the second stage of inquiry. The second
question then becomes what damage was caused by the act or omission?
Some people might even ask the question, what actual damage was caused by
the act or omission, thereby reducing the possible measure of damages. Some
people would say, measure the chance lost. To some it certainly would be
anomalous that if you lose a 30 per cent chance you can nevertheless recover in
full. To others, it may seem strange that if you lost 50 per cent chance, only
nominal damages would be awarded.
None of this is to suggest any clear solutions. Indeed it would be wrong for me
to generalise anyway because the outcome of particular cases will depend upon
the arguments and the facts of them. Do not, however, be too critical of me.
Cause and effect are not merely legal problems. They are problems, as I suggested
in the beginning, which concern the philosophy of life itself. On one view,
Nietzsche was one of the first deconstructionists and in his "The Will to Power"
he spoke of cause and effect in terms of chronological reversal:45
The fragment of the outside world of which we become conscious comes after the effect that has been
produced on us and is projected a posteriori as its "cause". In the phenomalism of the "inner world" we
invert the chronology of cause and effect. The basic fact of "inner experience" is that the cause gets
imagined after the effect has occurred.
I mentioned earlier that palliative care is one area in which rules of causation
are being tested. As is often the case with the intersection of law and medicine,
approaches to causation and palliative care do not sit easily together. The spectre
of criminal sanction for the administration of palliative care may produce
defensive medicine with the consequence that patients do not receive adequate
pain management. Equally, the law's demarcation between lawful palliative care
and unlawful homicide on the basis of the intention of the medical profession
administering the treatment does not always sit comfortably in the law of
homicide. Of course this issue raises fundamental ethical and legal problems,
which is undoubtedly one of the reasons that the present position is so uncertain.
That uncertainty must inevitably result in very difficult decisions for the
practising profession.
It is accepted that palliative care is concerned with the reduction of pain, an
incident of which may be bringing about the death of the patient more quickly
than otherwise. This can be distinguished from euthanasia, which seeks to relieve
pain and suffering by inducing death. The difference, according to Casswell is
"intended
and
between
but
consequences
foreseeable
unintended
consequences".46
It is arguable that palliative care demonstrates some of the inherent limitations
of the "but-for" test. Obviously, the underlying pathology of a terminally-ill
patient can be said to be the cause of death: but for that illness, the patient would
not die as he or she did. However, application of the same test could assign
responsibility to a practitioner for causing death through the administration of
large doses of morphine: but for the medical intervention, the patient would not
have died when he or she did.
The legal approach to causation in palliative care, however, is not the
application of the simple "but for" test, contrary to the views of some members of
the medical profession. The line between homicide and death brought about by
palliative care is drawn on the basis of intent – if the doctor deliberately gives a
patient an overdose of narcotics for the purpose of bringing about death, this will
constitute homicide. If the motivation is pain relief, then the fact that death is
incidental will not be sufficient to attract the operation of the criminal law.
In Airedale NHS v Bland, Lord Goff noted the established rule:47
A doctor may, when caring for a patient who is, for example, dying of cancer, lawfully administer pain-
killing drugs despite the fact that he knows that an incidental effect of the application will be to
abbreviate the patient's life. Such a decision may properly be made as part of the care of the living
patient, in his best interests; and, on this basis, the treatment will be lawful. Moreover, where the doctor's
treatment of his patient is lawful, the patient's death will be regarded in law as exclusively caused by the
injury or disease to which his condition is attributable.
It must be accepted that this is not a "but for" test.
Haugen notes that no doctor has ever been held liable in murder or assisted
suicide for providing a patient with high doses of medication for pain relief.48 An
English case which dealt with the liability of a medical practitioner for the
administration of life-shortening palliative care is R v Adams.49 Implicit in the
charge of Devlin J to the jury was the notion that administration of treatment
with the intent to relieve pain does not attract the censure of criminal law:
If the first purpose of medicine is the restoration of health, could no longer be achieved, there was still
much for the doctor to do, and he is entitled to do all that is proper and necessary to relive pain and
suffering, even if the measures he takes may incidentally shorten life.
His Lordship stated the distinction between culpable homicide and lawful
medical conduct as being a deliberate cutting of the thread of life, as opposed to
the administration of medical treatment which had the incidental effect of
determining the exact moment of death.
But what are the remaining problems with causation in the context of
palliative care? First, Haugen has observed that the greatest impediment to
successful prosecution of medical practitioners for assisting the death of a patient
through the administration of pain relief is causation. "Absent very aggravated
factors, the prosecution always has an uphill battle".50 Secondly, there is little
clear guidance given by the law to physicians concerning possible criminal
liability.51 Thirdly, it has been argued that a strict application of the criminal law
would result in far greater frequency of prosecution, because liability could be
established where acts are committed with the knowledge that death will result:
that hastening death is sufficient to constitute murder.52 Clearly, there is a tension
between the strict dictates of criminal law and the practice of palliative care.
Fourthly,
the misunderstanding in the medical profession about the nature of the correct
test of causation to be applied may lead to defensive medicine, resulting in
inadequate medication of terminally ill patients. It is even more ironic that if the
profession understood the test of intent which is in fact applied, they may still
practice defensive medicine in the knowledge that on a strict application of the
criminal law, they may find themselves liable in homicide.
However, all this must be tempered by the recognition that palliative care and
euthanasia are components of the same spectrum and that the Australian
legislatures have responded to the problems. In the Australian Capital Territory,
legislation ensures that patients have a right to receive adequate pain relief which
is "reasonable in the circumstances"53 and in South Australia, palliative care can
be administered to people who are dying and to protect them from medical
treatment which is "intrusive, burdensome and futile".54
* Justice of the High Court of Australia.
1 I Stewart, Does God Play Dice? The Mathematics of Chaos, Penguin, London, 1990, at 141.
2 B Nicholas, An Introduction to Roman Law, Oxford University Press, Oxford, 1962, at 165.
3 (1999) 73 ALJR 1190.
4 (1999) 73 Australian Law Journal 802-3.
5 (1976) 136 CLR 529.
6 See, respectively, Caparo Industries Plc v Dickman [1990] 2 AC 605; Candlewood Navigation
Corporation Ltd v Mitsui OSK Lines Ltd [1986] AC 1.
7 The similar strains which can be identified in the judgments are as follows. A) the circumstances in
which the common law recognises a duty of care such as will permit the recovery of pure economic
loss are not yet governed by any definite general principle, but by other factors which are still
developing. B) the law accepts the undesirability of imposing indeterminate liability on an
indeterminate class of persons and the imposition of liability in the pursuit of legitimate commercial
interests. C) factors of relevance are: common sense and practicality; avoiding interference or
impairment of legal rights, freedoms and controls established by common law and statute; the
plaintiff's vulnerability; whether the defendant knew or ought to have known that the plaintiff was
likely to suffer loss; whether the tortfeasor should have had the interests of the plaintiff in mind; the
defendant's capacity to avoid harm.
8 (1999) 73 ALJR 1190 at [405].
9 (1976) 136 CLR 529 at 576.
10 W Holdsworth, A History of English Law, 5th edn, Vol III, Methuen, London, 1942, at 379.
11 W Holdsworth, A History of English Law, 4th edn, Vol II, 1936, at 52.
12 See R Helme and D Mendelson, Chapter 13, below.
13 E Mesthene, "The Role of Technology in Society" in A Teich (ed), Technology and Man's Future, 2nd
edn, St Martin's Press, New York, 1977, at 160.
14 See Chapter 11, beiow.
15 (1991) 171 CLR 506.
16 Ibid, at 509.
17 Ibid.
18 Fitzgerald v Penn (1954) 91 CLR 268 at 276; Chappel v Hart (1998) 195 CLR 232 at 243 per Gaudron J.
19 S Martin, "Studies in the New Causality", The New Yorker, 26 October 1998.
20 (1842) 10 M&W 546 [152 ER 588.,
21 J Fleming, The Law of Torts, 9th edn, Law Book Company, London, 1998, at 31.3
22 Marks v GIO Australia Holdings Ltd (1998) 73 ALJR 12.
23 (1991) 171 CLR 506.
24 Fleming, op cit, n21, at 218.
25 (1999) 162 ALR 540 at 547.
26 (1998) 195 CLR 232.
27 Chaplin v Hicks [1911] 2 KB 786 (deprivation of all chance of obtaining a prize); cf McRae v
Commonwealth Disposals Commission (1951) 84 CLR 377 at 412 (where the chance lay not in giving
the plaintiff a chance, but in the nature of the thing contracted for itself); Sellars v Adelaide
Petroleum (1994) 179 CLR 332 (loss of an opportunity to obtain a commercial advantage or benefit).
28 See Kirby J in Chappel v Hart (1998) 195 CLR 232 at 274-5 and Gaudron J in Naxakis v Western General
Hospital (1999) 162 ALR 540 at 547-8.
29 Naxakis v Western General Hospital (1999) 162 ALR 540 at [30].
30 N Jansen, "The Idea of a Lost Chance" (1999) 19(2) Oxford Journal of Legal Studies 271.
31 See Gaudron J in Naxakis v Western General Hospital (1999) 162 ALR 540 at [32].
32 Chappel v Hart (1998) 195 CLR 232 at [61] per Gummow J.
33 Chappel v Hart (1998) 195 CLR 232 at [16] per Gaudron J.
34 (1997) 188 CLR 241.
35 Ibid, at 285.
36 Ibid, at 285-6 (footnote omitted).
37 Ibid, at 286.
38 D Mendelson, "The Breach of the Medical Duty to Warn and Causation: Chappel v Hart and the
Necessity to Reconsider Some Aspects of Rogers v Whitaker" (1998) 5 Journal of Law and Medicine
312 at 317-18.
39 (1998) 159 ALR 170.
40 (1991) 172 CLR 378.
41 Naxakis v Western General Hospital (1999) 162 ALR 540 at [30] per Gaudron J.
42 Naxakis v Western General Hospital (1999) 162 ALR 540 at [129]-[130].
43 (1992) 175 CLR 479.
44 See Cartledge v E Jopling & Sons Ltd [1963] AC 758.
45 Quoted in JD Culler, On Deconstruction, Cornell University Press, Ithaca, New York, 1982, at 86.
46 DG Casswell, "Rejecting Criminal Liability for Life-Shortening Palliative Care" (1990) 6 Journal of
Contemporary Health Law and Policy 127 at 130, citing "President's Commission for the Study of
Ethical Problems in Medicine and Biomedical and Behavioural Research, Deciding to Forego Life-
Sustaining Treatment" 82 (1983) 77.
47 [1993] 2 WLR 316 at 379.
48 P Haugen, "Pain Relief for the Dying: The Unwelcome Intervention of the Criminal Law" (1997) 23
William Mitchell Law Review 325 at 329. However, since this article Dr Jack Kervorkian has been
convicted in a Michigan court of second degree murder on 26 March 1999.
49 Central Criminal Court, London, 1957, unreported, discussed in Palmer, "Dr Adams' Trial for Murder"
[1957] Crim LR 365.
50 Haugen, op cit, n48, at 356.
51 Casswell, op cit, n46, at 137-8.
52 See Active Voluntary Euthanasia – A Timely Reappraisal, University of Tasmania Law School
Occasional Paper, 1991.
53 Medical Treatment Act 1994 (ACT) s 4.
54 Consent to Medical Treatment and Palliative Care Act 1995 (SA) s 3(c).