4 Aspects of Causation in Hippocratic
Medicine and Roman Law of Delict
DANUTA MENDELSON*
Introduction
The notion of causation is pivotal to law as well as to medicine, yet the concept of
causation is one where legal and medical minds do not necessarily meet. The
reason may lie in the two-faceted nature of this concept, for causation can be
defined as referring to either origins of phenomena or to the consequential
relationship between two events, one of which is claimed to have brought about
the other. Therefore, how the nature and function of causation is understood
depends on whether emphasis is placed on causation in the sense of sources and
constituent elements, or on causation in the sense of a relationship between
occurrences. This is why concepts of legal and medical causation, though they
seem similar, have different contents. As a result, dialogue between the two
disciplines tends to be in parallel, with messages between them interpreted in
each profession's own, different way.
The question is whether this was always so, and how did these two ancient
disciplines approach the concept of causation historically during their greatest
periods of flowering and influence. Classical Greek medicine between the 5th and
2nd century BCE developed many concepts of scientific epistemology and
causation that survived well into the nineteenth century, moulding modern
medical and scientific thinking. Likewise, notions of legal causation developed by
the Roman Law of delict from the Republican lex Aquilia in c287-286 BCE to the
promulgation of the Digest1 and Institutes2 by Justinian (527-565) in 533 CE still
influence the legal discourse of causation.
Hippocratic Medicine
Many classical Greek concepts of medical epistemology and causation form part
of modern medical and scientific thinking. In particular, Greek physicians
developed a notion of rational aetiology, which involves correlation of disease to
cause. The aetiology of a condition or disease would be arrived at through the
process of diagnosis. The texts in the Hippocratic Corpus, reflect Greek
physicians' clinical methods of physical examination: asking the patient about his
or her symptoms; social and family history; observing the signs of the condition;
and, if appropriate, performing such additional diagnostic tests as listening to the
patient's chest, examination of urine, faeces and sputum.3 This was done in order
to group signs and symptoms into "descriptions of familiar, more or less standard
clusters called syndromes",4 with the final syndrome constituting the diagnosis in
accordance with the medical theory acceptable at the time. Medical theory
enabled the physician to decide "what is a significant sign and what helped to
correlate symptoms with syndrome, syndrome with disease, and disease with its
cause".5 Although diagnostic techniques and evaluation of the findings have
changed, the actual process of arriving at diagnosis and its correlation to
aetiology has remained essentially constant. At least since the time of
Hippocrates (460-377 BCE), at the beginning of the therapeutic process,
physicians would invariably ask the question "why", in the sense of what is the
source or what are the sources of the patient's complaint. The answers would
often depend on the prevailing medical theory.
In the classical Greece of the 5th and 4th century BCE, medical beliefs about
the nature of sickness and health were closely linked to philosophical theories
about the nature and order of the universe. Pythagoras of Croton (c530 BCE)
suggested that the universe is governed by a dynamic balance of contraries, based
on the opposition of odd and even numbers. The human body was seen as a
microcosm of the universe (macrocosm),6 whereby, according to Parmenides of
Elea (c515-450 BCE), health and disease were affected by processes of change and
stability within the universe.7 Empedocles of Sicily (fl mid-5th century BCE)
posited that nature was composed of four basic elements – earth, air, fire, and
water – that combined into temporarily stable mixtures. Having further
developed the ideas of Parmenides, and applied them to physiology, he argued
that the source of living processes, including digestion, was an innate heat, with
the heart as the furnace. Consequently, the function of breathing was to cool the
body, and the function of the liver was to produce blood to nourish the tissues.
Hippocratic medicine, conceived as "a science of hidden things or causes
(episteme), on the basis of which one could reason in therapeutic terms",8 looked
to philosophy for epistemic explanations of the human condition. For example,
Alcmaeon of Croton (fl 470 BCE)9 explained the fundamental principles
governing health and disease through the Pythagorean notion of "pairs of bodily
powers – hot and cold, sweet and sour, wet and dry. Seated in the blood, marrow
or brain, illness could arise from an external cause or internal imbalance, caused
by too much or too little nutriment."10 This blend of medico-philosophical ideas,
combined with scientific observation of nature and clinical experience of
physicians led to creation of the humoral theory of medicine.
This medical theory, articulated in the writings of the Hippocratic Corpus,11
involved a symmetrical grid of binary oppositions, and was based on a notion
that the body was composed of four essential body fluids.12 These fluids, chymoi,
or "humours" – which gave the theory its name – were blood (sanguis), phlegm
(pituita), yellow bile (chole), and black bile (melanchole). The four physiological
humours met in binary combination with the Pythagorean pairs of bodily powers
to constitute the four "essences" (air, earth, fire and water). In turn, these essences
were the constituents of all matter.13 Thus, humours, were integrated within a
wider schema of natural order. Black bile was linked to the essence of earth, the
season of autumn, and melancholy temperament.14 Its opposite was blood, related
to the essence of air, spring, and sanguine temperament. Yellow bile was linked to
the essence of fire, summer, and choleric temperament. Its opposite was phlegm,
connected with water, winter, and phlegmatic temperament.15 The scheme was
supplemented by four ages of man (childhood, youth, adulthood, and old age) and
the notions of moderation and excess in moral behaviour.16 The author of The
Sacred Disease, for example, wrote that the cause of epileptic convulsions was
cold phlegm from the brain being discharged into blood-vessels, thus chilling the
warm blood, obstructing its flow, and blocking the air-ways.17
The function of medicine was defined as "the complete removal of the distress
of the sick, the alleviation of the more violent disease and the refusal to undertake
cure of cases in which the disease has already won the mastery, knowing that
everything is not possible to medicine".18 The person's well-being and illness –
and hence the general question of aetiology in Hippocratic medicine – was
framed in terms of imbalances, be they physiological, environmental or moral.
Once the cause of the harmful condition was ascertained, physicians would strive
to heal their patients by restoring the humoral equilibrium.19
Triggering and Latent Causes
The complex theory of humoral medicine was scientific.20 It provided rational
explanations of verifiable causes of diseases, as against ascribing them to an
undifferentiated chance or a divine ordinance.21 It was a Hippocratic credo that
knowledge of natural causes would enable physicians to provide correct
treatment.22
Aristotle (384-322 BCE) furnished the humoral model with epistemological
framework. His epistemology was based on a teleological view of the world,
which considered that everything in nature has its purpose, aim or goal (telos),
including all bodily organs and functions.23 Aristotle identified four different
categories of explanation, which he called causes:24 "formal" (defining
characteristics),25 "material" (constituent elements),26 "efficient" (origin or source
of transition from one state or occurrence to another),27 and "final" (in the sense
of aim or goal).28
Aristotle's concept of final causality was an integral dimension of the
teleological approach to the natural order in the universe, which was regarded as
divine.29 However, Hellenistic physicians left to philosophy the ultimate search
for the final or "first causes of all nature" within a teleological framework of the
universe.30 Nevertheless, they adopted the Aristotelian distinction between
material and efficient causes, as well as a further distinction between essential or
significant causes and accidental or insubstantial (trivial) causes. This analysis of
causes was further refined by distinguishing evident or triggering causes from the
latent or underlying causes, in the sense of being natural rather than
supernatural, yet hidden from sensory knowledge.31 Aristotle, and later,
physicians belonging to such Hellenistic medical schools as Herophilean and
Erasistratean, endeavoured to discover latent or underlying causes of diseases
through systematic study of biology, anatomy, pathology and physiology.32 They
used scientific inquiry as means of ascertaining causal origins, episteme, of
humoral imbalances. Epistemology of medical causation enabled them to
understand not only how,33 but also why diseases occur.34
But within its theoretical framework, the clinical art of humoral medicine was
concerned with individual suffering to which practical solutions had to be found
and applied. These solutions depended on the accurate identification of efficient
or triggering causes that incorporated formal and material causality. Galen's
description of different kinds of inflammations35 provides a good example of the
use of medical reasoning in terms of causes. In his Cancer and Related Diseases,
Galen pointed out that although physicians did not know latent causes of
inflammation, they were nevertheless able to create a systematic humoral theory
for diagnosis of swellings caused by inflammation. Formal causes such as body
temperature and influx of blood with consequent exclusion of air36 were
important because:
A major swelling never comes to any part of the body unless it suffers one or the other of these two
things relative to its substance: either it is suffused with too much heat and is boiling hot, so to speak, or
it has recently acquired some substance from without.37
Clinical observation enabled them to classify the inflammation in terms of
material causes. These included swellings consequent upon a wound, an abscess
or spontaneous growth. Hippocratic physicians would also observe the colour,
size, mutations, secretions (clear serum or pus) and smell of the affected part, and
then attribute the inflammation to such triggering causes as the high density of
blood (an impacted humour) or bilious humours (bitter and black bile). Thus in
clinical practice, identification of triggering causes was essential in diagnosing
syndromes, which were ascertained from signs and symptoms. In this sense, the
primary function of causation in medicine was "adjectival" or classificatory.
Modern medicine, just as its Hippocratic ancestor, differentiates between the
epistemological search for latent causes and efficient causality, which often
provides sufficient explanation for diagnosis, prognosis and treatment.
Delictual Actions in Roman Law
In his Nicomachean Ethics, Aristotle developed theory of justice that was to
profoundly influence the concept of legal causality in Western jurisprudence. In
particular, Aristotle defined the concept of corrective justice as one that "plays a
rectifying part in transactions between man and man".38 This sentence was later
interpreted as referring to "judicial justice" whereby the judge restores the just
equilibrium in a "bipolar relationship" of rights and entitlements that have been
wrongfully disturbed.39 It is a moot point whether his concept of corrective
justice was influenced by the Hippocratic notion of disease as an imbalance of
humoral properties.40
Aristotle did not distinguish between crimes and torts.41 Private law, as we
understand it today, was developed by the Romans.42 Classical Roman law,
including delict,43 was underpinned by a binary paradigm – with moral
undertones. The Aristotelian notion of corrective justice is reflected in Ulpian's
definition of the two basic principles of the right conduct: "... not to harm any
other person, [and] to render to each his own."44 Jurisprudentially, the binary
paradigm of corrective justice45 required that plaintiffs be restored to the position
they enjoyed before sustaining loss or injury occasioned by the defendant's
wrongful conduct.46 This concept is not dissimilar to the humoral theory whereby
the aim of medical intervention is to return the patient's homeostatic balance by
treating the cause of the imbalance. In law, the forensic process focused on
restoring the balance of equities through rendering "each his due". In determining
the balance of equities – rights and obligations – causation played an important
part at the procedural level, in substantive law, and at the policy level.
Though the development was gradual,47 in general, depending on the legal
context, Roman jurists tended to differentiate between:
ratio naturalis – reasoning derived from nature and "rooted in facts of
life, in objective reality"48 and
civilis ratio – technical legal reasoning that used analogy from the
precedents, or general principles of the Roman civil law49 to attribute
legal responsibility for the plaintiff's harm. The arguments were drawn
from a jurisprudential system of rights and obligations, which, in turn,
tended to be determined by moral and social policy considerations.
At the same time, the modern distinction between factual causation and legal
causation, which depends on a contrast between causal conditions (generally but-
for conditions) and proximate causes,50 was foreign to the Roman sources. To the
Roman lawyers, causes were, in Aristotle's language, efficient causes. Within
efficient causes, the jurists distinguished between direct and indirect causes,
especially in relation to Aquilian liability (discussed below), which was where
medical problems were most likely to arise.
Procedurally, under the Roman lex Aquilia, causation determined whether a
remedy was available. At the substantive law level, again, factual causation
helped to determine whether or not the conduct complained of was wrongful.
Causation as a Determinant of Delictual Remedies
Unlike the Hippocratic system of medicine, where there existed from an early
stage an integral link between philosophy and medical theory, Roman
jurisprudence, initially, that is until the advent of republican jurists,51 seems to
have developed without a systematic body of philosophical assumptions and
principles.52 Remedies (actiones) for delictual wrongs evolved gradually, from
punitive prescriptions in the Twelve Tablets dating from c450 BCE, to republican
lex Aquilia,53 praetorian policy actions, and actions on the facts in Justinian's
Digest and Institutes. The availability of Roman delictual actions was predicated
on whether the plaintiff's financial harm (damnum) was classified as directly or
indirectly caused by the defendant.54 Consequently, the two types of efficient
cause (direct or indirect) had a classificatory function in relation to the threshold
question of the appropriate remedy.
The statutory actio legis Aquiliae provided for penal and restorative56 damages.
To recover, the plaintiff had to establish both a direct causal connection between
death or injury of a slave or four-footed grazing animal, and iniuria,57 that is, the
wrongful nature of the defendant's conduct. Initially, establishing efficient
causation under lex Aquilia was not difficult, because the law required the cause
of injury to be a direct and positive act "by the body to the body" (corpore
datum).58 With time, liability was extended to blameworthy conduct causing
death of the plaintiff's slave indirectly by dropping something on him, or
drowning a slave by throwing him or her from a bridge. According to Celsus,59 in
drowning cases, it was irrelevant whether the immediate cause of the slave's
death was the immediate impact with the water, exhaustion, or the force of
current.60 Nevertheless, while the requirement of direct positive action
remained,61 where the positive action led indirectly to loss, as when the
defendant pushed someone who fell against and killed the plaintiff's slave,62 the
causal link would be regarded as too indirect63 for it to be a case of "killing".
However, Ulpian, writing at the time of Caracalla (211-217CE), commented that
an action on the facts (actio in factum) would be granted for causing death.
It was in the final decades of the Republic,64 that delictual liability was
extended to indirectly caused wrongful death of slaves under praetorian policy
actions65 "in the spirit of the law" (actiones utilis legis Aquiliae)66 and actions "on
the facts" (actiones in factum).67 These actions were also used to expand liability
under Chapter III of the lex Aquilia to include indirect conduct causing actual
(physical) harm or loss to property.68 Celsus distinguished between directly
causing death, and furnishing an indirect cause of death.69 He gave two examples:
administration of poison instead of medicine, and handing a sword to a
"madman" who, presumably, killed himself with it.70 Labeo71 observed that where
an abortifacient was administered directly by pouring it down the woman's
throat and she died, the conduct amounted to killing (occidere), and fell within
the lex Aquilia. By contrast, if the woman was handed the drug for self-
administration and died, the person giving the abortifacient had not "killed" her,
but had "caused her death" indirectly, since a voluntary act on her part
intervened in the chain of events. This conduct was in the course of time treated
by the lawyers and praetors as sufficient for liability (mortis causam praestare),
and action on the facts would be granted.72 In other words, an indirect efficient
cause came to be accepted as sufficient for liability.
Thus efficient causation became central to the question of liability under
actions on the facts for "mortis causam praebere", which extended delict to cover
indirect loss occasioned without harmful physical contact.73 A person would be
liable to an action in factum, if by making smoke he killed or drove away
another's bees.74 An action on the facts for damages would also lie against a
defendant, who out of compassion, unchained the plaintiff's slave and enabled
him to escape.75 The action would lie, even though the plaintiff's loss of the slave
amounted to merely economic and not to physical harm.76 But then, economic
loss (damnum) was regarded as being of the essence of the lex Aquilia and
actions based on the analogy to it.77
Accordingly, as with humoral clinical medicine, the role of causation in the
context of delictual remedies was adjectival – its identification and
characterisation as either direct or indirect (furnishing the cause of death or loss)
classified the conduct, which in turn, determined the nature of remedy.
Attribution of Liability
In addition to causation, fault was needed for Aquilian liability. Liability would
be attributed to the defendant only if the additional element of iniuria, in the
sense of unlawfulness associated with fault, was present. Ulpian provided two
interrelated tests for establishing iniuria: non iure, that is absence of right
(justification),78 and fault (culpa).79 Broadly, the notion of fault or
blameworthiness80 was the determining criterion of liability. Broadly, the notion
of blameworthiness involved either: deliberate, intentional fault, as when
someone intentionally maimed or killed a slave, or, alternatively, unintentional
but unreasonable81 or careless82 (negligent)83 causing of harm.
The Romans, required both causation and culpability for responsibility under
the lex Aquilia and its extensions. However, they distinguished between
"causation" (culpability) and responsibility. Hence a problem arose when there
was fault on both sides. If the slave killed was at fault and so was the defendant,
then the act of each could be regarded as an efficient cause of the death or
wound. In such cases, the plaintiff was barred unless the defendant intended the
death etc, in which case the predominant fault was regarded as lying with the
defendant, who could be regarded as both an efficient and a final cause of the
death.
The defendant accused of having caused an injury could argue that though he
caused (was responsible) for the harm, his conduct was not culpable (he was not
at fault) because he had the right to perform the injurious act. In such case (an
irrebuttable presumption would arise that) the defendant was not liable, and
consequently, the harm caused to the plaintiff was not compensable. For example,
if a defendant threw a javelin and accidentally killed the plaintiff's slave, his
liability would depend on the presence or absence of justification and fault. If the
defendant was a soldier practising in a place reserved for military exercises,84
there would be no liability because he had the right to do what he did at the
particular location. Conversely, if the defendant was not a soldier, liability may
attach,85 since a civilian would not have the right to practise javelin-throwing at
a military training field. Likewise, a soldier practising javelin throwing in a non-
designated area could be liable, for he had no right to practise in a public place.86
Moreover, iniuria through culpa could attach to either the injurer or the
injured. For example, in the case of a killed slave, if the accident happened where
the slave had no right to be, the slave's fault was regarded as cancelling out the
defendant's fault, so that there was no liability on the defendant's part. The cause
of death would be attributed to the slave's own fault. A slave possessing the right
to be in the javelin training field, might still be adjudged to be at fault
(contributory negligence),87 on the basis that he failed to take care for his own
safety.88
In the javelin throwing examples, the act causing accidental death remained
the same. The analysis focused on the parties' respective legal rights and
culpability of their conduct, which determined fault and consequent attribution
of liability for the killing. However, whenever killing was deliberate, moral policy
considerations dictated that the Aquilian action would lie irrespective of the right
to practise javelin or the slave's contributory negligence.89
Direct and Indirect Causation in Multifactorial
Settings
The example of the javelin throwing accident illustrated how the attribution of
legal causality between two events depends on parties' perspectives. The plaintiff,
whose slave had the right to be at the place where the accident had occurred,
would attribute cause of death to the defendant's careless action in throwing the
javelin. However, the javelin thrower arguing contributory negligence, would
attribute the slave's death to the latter's careless walking into the javelin's
trajectory. Medicine would attribute the cause of death to the piercing wound
occasioned by a sharp instrument.
The issue of attribution of causal responsibility is even more difficult in cases
with multifactorial causation. Roman jurists did not develop jurisprudence
relating to direct and indirect causation in a multifactorial setting, even when
they provided examples of it, as in the following passage from Ulpian:
Further, Mela writes that, when some people were playing with a ball, one of them hit it hard and
knocked the hands of a barber with the result that the throat of a slave whom the barber was shaving
was cut by the jerking of the razor. In which of the parties does the fault lie? For it is he who is liable
under the lex Aquilia. Proculus says the blame is the barber's, and surely, if he was doing shaving in a
place where people customarily played games or where there was much going to and fro, the blame will
be imputed to him; but it is no bad point in reply that if someone entrusts himself to a barber who has
his chair in a dangerous place he has only himself to blame for his own misfortune.90
Both Proculus91 and Mela92 argued the issue of fault and consequent liability
on the basis that the direct, positive, though unintentional, action of the barber
was the efficient (legal) cause of the slave's death. According to Proculus, since
the barber's jerking motion was unintentional, his liability for causing the slave's
death would rest on the attribution of fault to his conduct of setting up a stall in a
dangerous place. Mela posited that the cause of the accident should be ascribed to
the victim's own fault in acquiescing to be shaved in a dangerous place. Neither
jurist asked whether the person who hit the ball "hard" and thus sparked the
chain of events was at fault. This omission naturally followed the right-as-
justification reasoning, because as long as the ball-player had the right to play
ball in that place, he was not at fault. Yet, hitting the ball hard in the direction of
a nearby barber's stall could amount to a careless, or even reckless act.93
It might be that Mela and Proculus purposely did not discuss possible liability
of the ball-thrower because they focused on the lex Aquilia rather than
praetorian actions and actions on the facts, concentrating on direct rather than
indirect causation. Nevertheless, it is odd that they did not analyse the chain of
causation in this case. Some 1800 years later, in the case of Scott v Shepherd,94 the
Court of Common Pleas would grapple with a not dissimilar case. The defendant,
Shepherd, threw a lighted squib made of gunpowder from the street into the
market-house. The squib landed on the stall of Yates. Willis, who was close by,
instantly picked it up and, to prevent an injury to himself, threw the squib across
the market-house onto the stall of Ryal, who in order to save his goods, at once
picked up the still lighted squib and threw it away. It struck the face of the
plaintiff, Scott, exploded, and blinded him in one eye. Three out of four judges
found Shepherd liable in battery because Willis and Ryal acted under a
compulsive necessity, and not as free agents. Consequently, their actions did not
break the chain of direct causation. Likewise, it could be arguable that in Ulpian's
example, the razor's cut was caused by the ball's impact on the barber's hands
and thus was directly attributable to the thrower.
In Scott v Shepherd, William Blackstone dissented, saying that Scott's injury
was indirect, and therefore should sound in action on the case – a common law
remedy for indirectly caused injuries. Again, this conclusion would have been
open in the ball-thrower's case, for, in contradistinction to the javelin-thrower's
act which directly caused the slave's death, the ball-thrower's act was an indirect
cause of the slave's throat being cut by the barber. Though it has to be
acknowledged that whereas Shepherd clearly did not have the right to throw the
lighted squib into the market, one must assume that the ball-player did have the
right to play ball in the street – at any rate the possible fault on the ball-player's
part is not discussed by Mela and Proculus.95
It has been suggested that Roman jurists concentrated on analysis of fault
because "it was easier to decide difficult cases by pinpointing the incidence of
fault than by asking who had actually caused the loss."96 But it is also arguable,
that while the Romans recognised the possibility or even likelihood of more than
one efficient cause of the death or injury, they held that as a matter of corrective
justice the plaintiff could not recover if one of the causes was the fault of himself
or his slave.97 The above examples suggest that the practical result of Roman legal
reasoning may have been the same as that envisaged by the Aristotelian concept
of corrective justice, even though Aristotle probably placed an emphasis on
evening out "losses" and "gains" in terms of causation, whereas Romans
approached the balance of justice in terms of fault.
Multiple Sufficient Causes: Mortal and Fatal Wounds
Determination of liability in cases where an assailant mortally wounded a slave
who died from a subsequently inflicted fatal wound raised the question of
multiple sufficient causes.98 This question was examined in the Digest by three
Roman jurists. Ulpian attributed to Celsus the following passage:
Celsus writes that if one attacker inflicts a mortal wound on a slave and another person later finishes
him off, he who struck the earlier blow will not be liable for a killing, but for wounding, because he [the
slave] actually perished as the result of another wound. The latter assailant will be held liable because he
did the killing.99
Likewise, according to Ulpian, the attacker who mortally wounded a slave
whose death was subsequently accelerated by the collapse of a house or a
shipwreck, or a blow, would be liable merely for wounding.100 Julian,101 while
discussing a case very similar to Ulpian's, provided a conclusion inconsistent with
the first two examples, when he wrote that:
... it is not only those who wound so as to deprive at once of life who will be liable for a killing in
accordance with the lex but also those who inflict an injury which is certain to prove fatal. Accordingly,
if someone wounds a slave mortally and then after a while someone else inflicts a further injury, as a
result of which he dies sooner than would otherwise have been the case, it is clear that both assailants
are liable for killing.102
Both Ulpian and Julian assumed that the conduct of the first assailant in each
of the three cases was blameworthy, and thus culpable. In issue, therefore was the
culpability of the supervening fatal event. The function of efficient causation in
the three examples was classificatory. However, this time, its purpose was to
determine the scope of legal responsibility in relation each event for the slave's
death (rather than the type of appropriate remedy). The three "wounding" cases
provide a classic example of the interplay between medical causal uncertainty
and its legal consequences. In each example, it was assumed that both the
"mortal" and the "fatal" wound was sufficient to cause death, but medicine could
not determine which wound was a significant and which was an insubstantial
cause of death. In other words, medicine could probably explain the organic
reasons of death, but could not apportion the causative legal factors. The law had
to find its own way of solving this conundrum.
The Roman jurists adopted two distinct approaches. Ulpian's approach was to
dissect the facts and to draw therefrom strict logical conclusions. The mortally
wounded slave was still alive when an independent supervening event killed him.
It was not known – and could not be known – for how long he would have lived.
Ulpian therefore attributed the cause of death to the supervening event, which
left the original attacker with legal liability merely for wounding. It was
irrelevant to the scope of the first assailant's legal – as against moral – liability,
whether or not the independent supervening event was blameworthy. If it was
blameworthy, then lex Aquilia would apply.
Julian resolved the issue in policy terms. On the basis of essentially identical
facts, he attributed legal liability for the killing to both assailants, though he
stated that each of the culprits would have to pay the owner a differentiated
amount in damages.103 From a causal point of view, Julian seemed to have
assumed that the inevitability of the slave's imminent death justified the
imposition of liability even if the slave did not in fact die of the first wound.
Since the first wrongdoer has not in fact killed the slave, the extension of liability
was based on policy grounds. Thus, Julian's conclusion did not stem from an
investigation of the causative factors; rather, it was based on a broad notion of
blameworthiness and the social consideration that "Misdeeds should not escape
unpunished, and it is not easy to decide if one is more blameworthy than the
other."104
Julian was not entirely satisfied with his analysis, for he ruefully observed that
"Indeed, it can be proved by innumerable examples that civil law has accepted
things for the general good that do not accord with pure logic".105
The appeal to a greater social or moral good as an excuse for the failure to
rigorously investigate and determine causation also tends to underlay the modern
law of causation in the context of negligence.
Loss Caused Through Careless Performance of Duty
Apart from harm caused by careless positive direct conduct, actio legis aquiliae
provided a remedy for careless performance of duty. Fault would be attributed to
someone who negligently performed services under a contract or for a fee.106 In
general, the standard of care for the purposes of delictual liability was very
high.107 The Digest stated that "under the lex Aquilia even the slightest degree of
fault counts".108 This meant that liability attached once damage was shown to
follow directly from wrongful failure to attain the required standard.
In contradistinction to Classical Greece, where the law absolved from blame a
physician whose patient died while under his care, both the Digest and Institutes
provide examples of medical culpability. The difference in approach to medical
liability may have been due to the fact that although Greek rational medicine
became known to the Romans in the third century BCE, it was never popular.109
Preference was given to traditional Roman medicine: a combination of folk
remedies and magical incantations invoking the help of the supernatural.110 The
rational Roman lawyers, must have regarded these healing practices with
unease.111 Indeed, Ulpian, discussing claims for fees, distinguished between
proper doctors, including specialists, who can sue for their fees, and those who
resort to incantation or exorcism. He called the latter impostors, though, he
added, there are those who say that the incantations etc have done them good.112
Be that as it may, Ulpian quoted Proculus saying that if a surgeon operated
negligently on a slave, the owner could have an action either under contract or
under the lex Aquilia.113 Gaius observed that "the law is just the same if one
[doctor] misuses a drug, or, if having operated efficiently, the aftercare is
neglected; the wrongdoer will not go free, but is deemed to be guilty of
negligence".114
Ulpian's statement regarding negligently performed operations, and Gaius'
instance of misuse of drugs would fall within Aquilian liability because of the
requirement of wrongful positive conduct causing loss to the plaintiff was
fulfilled. However, Gaius' example of the failure to provide post-operative care
involved an omission, rather than positive conduct. Omissions, as a general rule,
did not give rise to an action in delict in classical law,115 except under actio in
factum or actio utilis legis Aquiliae, where the defendant had previously made a
positive undertaking and then failed to carry it out.116 Admittedly, this part of the
commentary in the Digest is dealing with the fault rather than causal issues of
what amounts to killing or wounding. Nevertheless, Gaius would have assumed
that the doctor's fault was a cause of injury or death, since otherwise the action
would not lie.
The example of post-operative care presages some contemporary conceptual
problems involving the issue of fault and external as against inherent causes of
harm. Many medical malpractice suits turn on the question whether liability for
the plaintiff's harm should be attributed to the nature of the medical condition or
to the conduct of the medical attendant. In other words, in determining
causation, should the law examine why the slave died or should it merely
consider how he died, thus conflating fault with causation.117
The structure of the Digest whereby key words in the law were discussed in
turn, led the Roman jurists to focus separately on the different elements in the
action – the defendant's conduct, including its relation to the outcome; the issue
of fault, including the fault on the part of the plaintiff's slave; the right to sue; the
damages or penalty recoverable. Ulpian's and Gaius' commentary on medical
negligence occurs at point where fault (iniuria) is being analysed.118
Consequently examination of liability for medical negligence is confined to the
question whether the doctor was at fault, leaving aside the question of what his
fault, if shown to be present, may or may not have caused. The inquiry into
causal processes, so far as contemporary medicine allowed of it, fell under the
discussion of what constituted killing, wounding, etc. Naturally, there may have
been a tendency to suppose that the doctor, had he not been at fault, could have
cured the patient or improved his or her condition.119
The question "how" did the slave die could be answered by stating that he died
without having received a visit from the surgeon, thus causally linking slave's
death with the surgeon's failure to attend him. The question "why" did he die
would have pointed the legal inquiry in the direction of the slave's medical
condition. For example, his death might have been caused by post-operative heart
failure or septicemia – both conditions were described in the Hippocratic
Corpus,120 and both were fatal until the 1940s. Admittedly, there is a suggestion
that the surgeon might have escaped liability if he could establish that he did
provide some aftercare. This is because he would then be able to argue that the
death was due to a cause other than his own neglect. Since he fulfilled his
obligations under the terms of agreement, no fault should be attributed to his
conduct.
Confined, though it is to the issue of fault – "what amounts to culpa?" – the
discussion of post-operative care did not exclude entirely the issue of causation. It
would have been known in Roman times, just as it is today, that some patients
may die with the best of care while others will survive with none. Gaius thus
provided an early example of attribution of causal liability based on policy
considerations involving general creation and enforcement of acceptable
normative standards under the law of obligations,121 rather than through
determination of particular medical causes.
Conclusion
The examination of the approach to causation in Hippocratic medicine and
Roman law of delict suggest that in both disciplines, identification of material
causes had a classificatory function. In medicine, ascertainment of the efficient or
triggering causes was vital to the diagnosis and treatment of humoral imbalances.
In law, classification of a cause as direct or indirect determined the cause of
action, be it Aquilian, praetorian, or on the facts. In both disciplines causal
analysis was directed backwards – from the present medical condition or legal set
of circumstances to the source or act that caused the transition from the state of
physical, psychological or economic well-being to illness, harm or loss.
Moreover, in both disciplines triggering causes were considered to be a matter
of factual evidence drawn from observation and experience. In medicine, latent
causes were only accepted if based on facts. But, unlike the ascertainment of
triggering causes, knowledge of latent causes was not always essential for
efficacious treatment. For example, humoral medical theory held that the heart
was a furnace generating and distributing heat throughout the body.
Consequently, ancient Greek physicians, who meticulously observed the signs
and symptoms of heart failure did not correlate them with disordered cardiac
function. Instead, the syndromes were attributed to the phlegm (cold humour)
moving from the brain to the chest.122 This notwithstanding, they were able to
distinguish between many different syndromes, and in the case of pleural
effusion, prescribe treatment to drain fluid in the chest, a procedure which did
not differ too much from contemporary techniques.123
In modern medical practice, the diagnostic process would still proceed from
symptoms to diagnosis of syndromes, disease entities and aetiologies. Though
today, the medical theory requires that the correlative reasoning regarding
medical diagnosis and causation be based on estimates of statistical probability.124
However, application of statistical probabilities to diagnosis, aetiology and
prognosis in the context of a particular condition presented by the patient is still
to be fully worked out. Moreover, even today, not all causes of medical conditions
are known and not all factual information is totally reliable.
In the face of causal uncertainty, modern physicians, just like their ancient
Greek counterparts concentrate on alleviating symptoms. For instance,
hypertension or high blood pressure may be caused by a number of medical
conditions including kidney disease and uraemia or other toxic conditions;
endocrine disorders such as hyperthyroidism and acromegaly; artery disease
which reduces elasticity, and tumours of the central portion (medulla) of the
adrenal gland.125 However, primary or "essential hypertension" has no apparent
specific organic cause. If a known organic cause cannot be found, the diagnosis
will be that of primary or "essential hypertension", and the condition will be
treated symptomatically.
Roman law focused on the circumstantial or factual connection between the
defendant's conduct and the plaintiff's harm, but determined the ultimate
question of liability on the basis of both causation and fault, neither being
sufficient by itself for liability. This meant that efficient causality was ascertained
by asking how rather than why the harm and its alleged legal causes were linked.
In the modern law of torts, the distinction based on direct and indirect causation
is nominally preserved in the divide between trespass and action on the case. The
distinction is clearest in torts of trespass to land and nuisance, but it has become
rather fuzzy in the tort of negligence.126 Moreover, in the classic delictual
paradigm, the wording of the lex and the formulae to give effect to it suggest that
the iniuria issue and the causal issue were taken together (iniuria occiderit). In
Ulpian's commentary iniuria was discussed before occiderit.127 This paradigm
was followed in the tort of negligence. Fault, measured in terms of the
defendant's response to foreseeable risk of harm,128 is determined first, and then
legal nexus in terms of causation may or may not be found between the culpable
conduct and the alleged harm. For example, when a modern plaintiff complains
about an injury in the form of hypertension allegedly due to the wrongdoing of
the defendant employer, the defendant's lawyer, while admitting the client's fault
may deny liability on the grounds of causation.129 This is because legal liability
will be attributed to the defendant only if the plaintiff can show that it was the
defendant's wrongful conduct rather than such factors as death of a loved one,
stressful divorce, gambling or other addiction, that on the balance of probabilities,
caused or materially contributed to the risk of the injury by way of
hypertension.130 Therefore, although scientific causal explanations are considered,
ultimately, the decision is reached on the basis of policy considerations rather
than a logical extrapolation from established facts. The analysis of "wounding"
and medical malpractice cases in the Digest illustrates how Roman jurists
approached the issue of causation and fault.
The shift in emphasis from factual causation to legal causation has been
exacerbated in the modern law of negligence by the test of fault defined as failure
to foresee the risk of harm. Romans adopted the standard of diligence and
foreseeability. Paul,131 quoting Sabinus'132 wrote that: "there is a fault when what
could have been foreseen by a diligent man was not foreseen ..."133 Modern law
has incorporated the notion of risk into this test. The notion of foreseeability of
the risk of harm, as against foreseeability of harm, is inchoate at best, but where
the harm is known to have eventuated, asking whether the risk of it occurring
was foreseeable amounts to foretelling the past.134 This kind of reasoning makes
the question of factual causation, in the sense of inductive reconstruction of past
events, superfluous. Yet it is important for the intellectual credibility of the law, if
not for the higher goal of achieving corrective justice, that a careful analysis be
explicitly undertaken as to how the defendant's conduct and the plaintiff's harm
are causatively linked. At the same time, the general question why something has
happened belongs to the realm of sociology, politics, philosophy, and medical
science. It is not the issue with which either Roman or modern courts have
grappled. Their task has always been to determine whether some defined harm
has been caused by some particular wrongful act.
* Senior Lecturer at the School of Law at Deakin University. I acknowledge with deep gratitude the help
of Professor Antony Honoré who made a number of extensive comments on an earlier draft of this
chapter. They have changed my understanding of the structure and the internal logic of the Digest
and, hence, the Roman law of delict.
1 The Digest comprises fifty books of excerpts from the writings of the classical jurists dating from the
late Roman Republic to the beginning of the 3rd century CE. All quotations are from The Digest of
Justinian, translation edited by Alan Watson, vol 1, University of Pennsylvania Press, Philadelphia,
1985.
2 Institutes was envisaged as an elementary textbook for law students, based in large part on the
Institutes of Gaius.
3 Results of diagnostic tests also fall within the category of signs. It is acknowledged today that the
process of diagnosis is not a one off event, but effectively continues through each stage of therapy.
4 N Laor & J Agassi, Diagnosis: Philosophical and Medical Perspectives, Kluwer Academic Publishers,
Dordrecht/Boston, 1990, at p32.
5 Ibid.
6 Roy Porter, The Greatest Benefit to Mankind: A Medical History of Humanity From Antiquity to the
Present, Harper Collins, London, 1997, at p54.
7 For example, Parmenides of Elea (c 515-450 BCE). Roy Porter, op cit, n6, at p54.
8 Danielle Gourevitch referring to Definitiones Medicae in the Galenic corpus in "The Paths of
Knowledge", in MD Grmek, Western Medical Thought from Antiquity to the Middle Ages, Harvard
University Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts, 1998, at p104.
9 Alcmaeon was the first to scientifically establish that the brain was the chief organ of sensation.
10 See Porter, op cit, n6, at p55.
11 The Hippocratic Corpus consists of about 60 treatises, the collection of aphorisms, the Oath and the
Canon. Some of the treatises and aphorisms were written by Hippocrates himself. However, the
Corpus as a whole is the work of a large number of medical writers of ancient Greece compiled
between 430 and 300 BCE, with subsequent interpolations.
12 This theory was developed by the pupil of Hippocrates, Polybus. Much later, it was adopted by Galen.
13 C Singer & EA Underwood, A Short History of Medicine, 2nd edn, Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1962, at
p46.
14 Black bile was associated with leprosy, malaria, melancholic madness and cancer.
15 Based on each individual's unique temperament, history, and the season of the year associated with the
complaint, treatment was specifically tailored to restore the balance appropriate to any given patient.
16 In Roman times, the Greek model was augmented by humours of the four periods of day, four types of
fever, four tastes, and four colours. The humoral model became more complex and unscientific when
in medieval times four musical tonalities, and the four Evangelists were added; V Nutton, "Medicine
in the Greek World, 800-50 BC" in LI Conrad, M Neve, V Nutton, R Porter & A Wear, The Western
Medical Tradition 800 BC to AD 1800, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1995, pp24-5.
17 Hippocrates, "The Sacred Disease", GER Lloyd (ed), (trans J Chadwick & WN Mann), in Hippocratic
Writings, Penguin Classics, Harmondsworth, 1983, para 10, at p245.
18 "The Science of Medicine", ibid, n17, para 3, at p140.
19 "Pain occurs when one of the substances [blood, phlegm, yellow and black bile] presents either
deficiency or excess, or is separated in the body and not mixed with the others." Hippocrates, "The
Nature of Man" in (trans J Chadwick & WN Mann), The Medical Works of Hippocrates, Springfield,
Ill, Charles C Thomas, 1950.
20 Today, however, the paradigm of humoral medicine would be regarded as pseudo-scientific because its
causal framework that cannot be falsified within its own terms. In other words, the model was
capable of explaining the cause of any illness in terms of imbalance – a surfeit or deficit of humours
and their associated qualities: see Nutton, op cit, n16, at p25.
21 "Every phenomenon [in nature] will be found to have some cause, and if it has a cause, chance [being a
cause of cure] can be no more than an empty name. The science of medicine is seen to be real both in
the causes of various phenomena which occur and in the provisions which it takes to meet them...".
"The Science of Medicine", supra, n17, para 6, at p141.
22 "To know the cause of a disease and to understand the use of various methods by which disease may be
prevented amounts to the same thing in effect as being able to cure the malady". "The Science of
Medicine," supra, n17, para 11, at p145.
23 The famous example provided by Aristotle was the duck's webbed feet, which he explained were for
the sake of swimming, an activity that supports the goal of a duck's existence, which is to find food in
the water so as to stay alive.
24 Aristotle, Metaphysics [1013a][1] (b) 33.
25 Ibid, [994a][1]; [1013a][1] (g).
26 Ibid, [1013b][1].
27 Ibid, [1013b][1]; [1013a][20] (a).
28 Ibid, [994b][1].
29 Ibid, [994a][1]; [994b][1]. Aristotle's teleological approach was later adopted by Christian philosophers,
which led to the symbiosis between religion and medieval science, including medicine (medieval
physicians regarded all causes of disease as being of divine origin). This link was only severed by
Cartesian philosophers of the 17th century, who rejected the concept of final causality.
30 M Vegetti, "Between the Knowledge and Practice: Hellenistic Medicine" in Grmek, op cit, n8, at p78.
31 J Jouanna, "The Birth of Western Medical Art" in Grmek, op cit, n8, at p50.
32 See Vegetti, supra, n30.
33 The medical school of Empirics considered that for the practice of medicine, only knowledge of
triggering causes, obtained through empirical experience was of any importance.
34 Apart from anatomy and physiology, modern medicine looks to biochemistry, neurosciences, genetics,
etc, to provide scientific explanations for medical pathologies and diseases.
35 "The word [inflammation] is customarily used by the Greek [physicians] to refer to fleshy parts in a
large swelling that occurs with tension, resistance, throbbing pain, heat and redness." Galen (trans J
Reedy), "On Cancer and Related Diseases" (1975) 10 Clio Medica 229.
36 Ibid, at 229.
37 Ibid.
38 "Of particular justice and that which is just in the corresponding sense, (A) one kind is that which is
manifested in distributions of honour or money or the other things that fall to be divided among
those who have a share in the constitution (for in these it is possible for one man to have a share
either unequal or equal to that of another), and (B) one is that which plays a rectifying part in
transactions between man and man." Aristotle (trans W D Ross), Nichomachean Ethics, Clarendon
Press, Oxford, Book V, 2.
39 EJ Weinrib, "The Gains and Losses of Corrective Justice" (1994) 44 Duke LJ 277. Judicial rectification of
wrongs in a particular case is predicated on understanding of the underlying rights that conform to
the notion of distributive justice. RA Epstein, "Symposium on Causation in the Law of Torts:
Causation – in Context: an Afterword" (1987) 63 Chi-Kent L Rev 653 at 654.
40 Aristotle (384-322 BCE), a son of the court physician from Stagira in Thrace, was very well familiar
with the theory of humoral medicine.
41 ARW Harrison, "Aristotle's Nichomachean Ethics, Book V, and the Law of Athens" (1957) 77 Journal of
Hellenic Studies 42 at 43. Though he did seem to distinguish between obligations arising out of
voluntary and involuntary involvement between parties. Harrison, at 45; Nichomachean Ethics, Book
V, 113.1a.2.
42 See generally RW Lee, The Elements of Roman Law, 4th edn, Sweet & Maxwell, London, 1956, at 371
(discussing the development of third party liability by the Romans): R Zimmerman, The Law of
Obligations, Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1996.
43 In Roman law delicts included theft, robbery, injury to property, and wilful injury to the person or
reputation.
44 D.1.1.10.1; Inst. 1.1. pr. This affirmation of right conduct, which begins with "To live honourably", was
formulated in the late third century in a work wrongly attributed to Ulpian (- 223 CE). It was
influenced by philosophical thought of the following generation, perhaps from the circle of Origen.
See T Honoré, Ulpian, Oxford University Press, Oxford, 1982, 111-13; D Liebs, "Ulpiani Regulae –
Zwei Pseudepigrapha" in Romanitas-Christianitas. Untersuchungen zur Geschichte und Literatur der
roöischen Kaiserzeit, 1982, pp282-92.
T45 he Roman notion of corrective justice under lex Aquilia was not only compensatory, but also extended
to penalties in a multiple of the loss in cases where, if the defendant denied liability, twice the loss
would be payable to the victim.
46 Neither the Aristotelian notion of justice, nor the Roman ideal of just and fair legal system extended to
slaves. Slaves were res mortales (mortal objects), and their death or injury was regarded as a
proprietary loss for the plaintiff-owner.
47 V Palmer, "A General Theory of the Inner Structure of Strict Liability: Common Law, Civil Law, and
Comparative Law" (1988) 62 Tul L Rev 1303 at 1313 argues that under Twelve Tablets liability was
strict and determined solely by the issue of causation, namely whether a person or thing was in fact
the cause of an unlawful result.
48 P Stein, "The Development of the Notion of Naturalis Ratio" in A Watson (ed), Daube Noster, Scottish
Academic Press, Edinburgh, 1974, at pp312-13.
49 Ibid.
50 In the modern tort of negligence, the legal issue of causal connection between the defendant's conduct
and the harmful result is also split into two questions: (i) the "factual" causation known as the causa
sine qua non ("but for") test, which effectively tests a hypothetical cause (would the damage have
happened but for the defendant's negligence in an identical set of circumstances?); and (ii) "proximate
causation" based on various normative tests that involve considerations of right, wrong and
economics as understood by the judiciary of the time. For an elegant critique of these concepts see
HLA Hart & T Honoré, Causation in the Law, 2nd edn. Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1985, pp98-108.
51 Until 300 BC, the interpretation of the law, in particular, the Twelve Tablets was the prerogative of the
College of Pontiffs, a quasi-religious body of public officials who passed down the law orally without
providing reasons for their rulings. Pontifex Quintus Mucius Scaevola published the first systematic
legal treatise, De iure civili, in the 80s BCE.
52 Roman jurisprudence seems to have had close interaction with Roman rhetoric, which discussed
concepts of proximate and remote cause as well as principal and antecedent causes. D Norr, "Causam
Mortis Praebere" in N MacCormick & P Birks (eds), The Legal Mind: Essays for Tony Honoré,
Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1986.
53 Lex Aquilia was a plebiscite, which was eventually incorporated into Corpus Juris Civilis. The statute
contained three Chapters. Chapters I and III dealt with remedies for wrongfully caused (damnum
iniuria datum) financial loss and damage to property. Chapter II, which became obsolete after the
beginning of the 2nd century CE, provided a remedy for stipulators who were victims of fraud. For a
discussion of the origins and nature of lex Aquilia, see Reinhard Zimmerman, supra, n42, at 955-7.
54 Roman actions were litigated in two stages. The parties would go before the magistrate, the praetor,
who would decide whether the dispute raised an issue recognised by the civil law, and which remedy
should apply. Then, the iudex, a layman chosen by the parties from a list of qualified citizens, would
conduct a trial and make determination. P Stein, "The Development of Law in Classical and Early
Medieval Europe: Interpretation and Legal Reasoning in Roman Law" (1995) 70 Chi-Kent L Rev 1539.
55 See n45. Lex Aquilia replaced fixed penalties for wrongful acts imposed under Twelve Tablets with a
more flexible assessment of the damages suffered by the victim. There were also noxal actions,
whereby a master who was sued for acts of a slave or a parent for the acts of a child, could hand over
the slave or child to the plaintiff, either to be sold for compensation or to suffer private vengeance.
56 A restorative (rei persequendae) action was intended to compensate the plaintiff for the actual loss he
had suffered (an award in excess of the loss would be regarded as penal): E Metzger (ed), A
Companion to Justinian's Institutes, Cornell University Press, Ithaca, New York, 1998, at pp224, 253.
57 The term "iniuria" had a number of meanings in Roman law. Ulpian distinguished the meaning of
"iniuria" in the sense of insult (giving rise to an action for insult) from wrongful or illegal conduct
which constituted fault for the specific purpose of Aquilian liability: D.9.2.5.1.
58 Actio directa corpora corpori: RW Lee, The Elements of Roman Law, 4th edn, Sweet & Maxwell, London
(1956) at p395. Julian, writing under the Antonines, provided the following legal definition of killing:
"A person is generally said to have killed if he had furnished a cause of death in any way whatever,
but so far as the lex Aquilia is concerned, there will be liability only if the death resulted from some
application of force, done as it were by one's own hand." D.9,2.51.pr.
59 Celsus worked in the time of Hadrian.
60 D.9.2.7.7; Inst. IV, 3, 16.
61 Actio utilis corpori non corpore (quasi ex legis Aquilia) D.47.2.51.
62 D.9.2.7.3.
63 For example, Julian disputing Proculus, pointed out that in relation to a defendant who set his dog
against the plaintiff's slave, the form of action would depend on whether the defendant had actually
held the dog at the time of attack or left the dog to perpetrate the attack without any physical
assistance: D.9.2.11.5.
64 The Republic came to an end in 27 BCE.
65 Policy actions (actiones utilis) were formulated by analogy with the standard action, where the facts set
out in the formula reflected the same policy underlying the standard action: Metzger, supra, n56, at
p246.
66 In post-classical law (ie, post Ulpian), actio utilis legis Aquiliae provided also a remedy to free persons
who were wrongfully injured. D.9.2.13.pr.
67 Praetorian edict allowed the formulation of actions on the facts (actiones in factum) sometime in the
latter part of the 2nd century BCE. In these non-standard actions, the judge's verdict was determined
by findings of fact. Gaius (G.3.219) did not mention action on the facts (actio in factum): Reinhard
Zimmerman, supra, n42, at pp981-2. In the Digest, the terms actio in factum and actio utilis are used
interchangeably.
68 Actionable loss included alteration of property, like causing wine to turn into vinegar. The term for the
relevant damage, introduced by Celsus, was "corrumpere" (corrupted, spoiled). The defendant would
be liable under an actio in factum: Zimmerman, supra, n42, at 984-5.
69 Under actions on the facts, defendants were liable for "furnishing a cause of death". Celsus quoted by
Ulpian in D.9.2.6.
70 D.9.2.7.6.
71 Labeo (- 10/11 CE). His Libri posteriores was an authoritative and systematic exposition of Roman law.
72 D.9.2.9.pr.
73 Actio in factum nec corpore nec corpori (ad exemplum legis Aquiliae). For a discussion of mortis
causam praebere, see Nörr, op cit, n52.
74 Ulpian, Digest, 9.2.49.pr. Two millennia later, this Roman doctrine seems to have been the basis for a
decision in Sneesby v The Lancashire and Yorkshire Rly Co [1875] 1 QB 42. In Sneesby, the English
Court of Appeal found the defendant railway company liable in negligence to the plaintiffs for the
loss of six head of cattle. The plaintiff's employees were driving the cattle across a level crossing
operated by the defendants, when several railway trucks were negligently allowed to run down the
tracks, separating the beasts from the drovers. As a result, the cattle "became infuriated", rushed
away, and were eventually found lying dead or dying on another part of the railway.
75 Justinian's Institutes, 4.3.16. R Evans-Jones & G MacCormack, "Obligations" in Metzger, supra, n56, at
p189.
76 Ulpian provided an example of an actionable indirect cause of material loss in the case of a plaintiff
who hired a plasterer to mend a vat. The plasterer punctured the side of the vat and, as a result, the
wine contained therein ran out, to the plaintiff's loss. Ulpian, D.9.2.27.35.
77 Antony Honoré, personal communication.
78 Justinian's Institutes, 4.3.2: "to kill unlawfully is to kill without any right". When the Aquilian Act was
enacted, the legal connotation of "iniuria" was non iure (without right). The liability was strict, but
the defendant would be exonerated if he established that he was exercising a legal right such as self
defence. Moreover, no liability would accrue under lex Aquilia in cases of killing by misadventure,
providing there was no fault or carelessness on the part of the defendant: Justinian's Institutes, 4.3.3.
79 Gaius in the 2nd century CE defined "wrongful" exclusively in terms of fault: G.3.211.
80 D.9.2.5.1.
81 Ulpian, D.9.2.5.2-3; Paul 9.2.6.
82 Ulpian, D.9.2.7.2, 8.
83 Gaius, D.9.2.8.
84 Justinian's Institutes, 4.3.4.
85 Ibid.
86 Ibid. The echo of attributing fault according to the appropriateness of place in which the harm-
producing activity took place can be found in Mitchell v Allestry (1676) 1 Vent 295, 3 Keb 650, where
the court held that "It was the defendant's fault, to bring a wild horse into such a place [Little
Lincoln's Inn Fields] where mischief might probably be done, by reason of the concourse of people."
87 Contributory negligence was a complete defence: A Borkowski, Textbook on Roman Law, Blackstone
Press, London, 1994, at p308.
88 D.9.2.9.4.
89 D.9.2.9.4.
90 D.9.2.11.pr.
91 Proculus, jurist arid law teacher worked in the middle of the 1st century CE.
92 Mela, an Augustan jurist contemporary of Labeo.
93 Ulpian does not mention whether the player was aware of the nearby barber's stall when he hit the
ball.
94 Scott v Shepherd (1773) 2 Wm B1 892; 3 Wils 403; [1558-1774] All ER 295.
95 A point made by Antony Honoré in personal communication.
96 R Evans-Jones & G MacCormack, supra, n75, at p88.
97 Professor Antony Honoré, personal communication.
98 JS Kortmann in "Ab alio ictu(s)\ Misconceptions about Julian's View on Causation" (1999) 20 Legal
History 95, refers to this passage of Ulpian as dealing with the issue of "supervening cause", which is
not entirely accurate in view of the fact that Ulpian describes the first wound as "mortal" (mortifero),
indicating that the slave was certain to die from it.
99 D.9.2.11.3.
100 D.9.2.15.1.
101 Julian (Iulianus Salivius), working under Hadrian, wrote 90 volumes of Digesta.
102 D.9.2.51.pr. According to A Watson, The Law of Obligations in the Later Roman Republic, Clarendon
Press, Oxford, 1965 at 245, the proposition contained in D.2.51.1: "This rule has the authority of the
ancient jurists, who decided that, if a slave were injured by several persons but it was not clear which
actually killed him, they would all be liable under the lex Aquilia" is an interpolation by Justinian for
which there is no authority.
103 D.9.2.51.2. In the 20th century, a similar approach to compensation for wrongfully inflicted personal
injuries, which are aggravated or exacerbated by subsequent tortious events, was adopted by the
House of Lords in the controversial case of Baker v Willoughby [1970] AC 467.
104 D.9.2.51.2.
105 D.9.2.51.2. (Julian, Digest, Book 86).
106 Rendering of services for a fee (locatio conductio operarum) was regarded as "mercenary activity", and
limited to services that were usually performed by slaves (opera illiberales), and lower class artisans
or craftsmen. In the Republican Rome, the majority of doctors were either slaves (servi) or freedmen
(liberti). The minority of wealthy Roman citizens who practised medicine (medicus ingenuus), would
do so under a contract of mandatum. On Roman law of contract, see: A Borkowski, supra, n87, at
p267.
107 The parties could vary the standard of care by terms of the contract.
108 Digest, 9.2.44,pr.
109 This may have been due to the fact that majority of Greek physicians in Rome were slaves or freedmen.
V Nutton, "Healers in the Medical Market Place: Towards a Social History of Graeco-Roman
Medicine" in A Wear (ed), Medicine in Society, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1992, at p39.
110 Under the Empire (31 BCE - 493 CE), cultic, frequently Oriental in origin, and superstitious faith
healing practices were widespread. DW Amunden & GB Ferngren, "Evolution of the
Physician/Patient Relationship: Antiquity Through Renaissance" in EE Shelp (ed), The Clinical
Encounter, D Reidel Pub Co, Dordrecht, 1983, at p13.
111 Not all Romans were scornful of Greek physicians. In 46 BCE, Julius Caesar presented all free-born
Greek physicians on Roman soil with the right of Roman citizenship.
112 Digest 50.13.1.3.
113 Ulpian, Digest, 9.2.7.8.
114 Gaius (130-180 CE) probably wrote his Institutes around 161 CE. Digest, 9.2.8.pr; Justinian's Institutes
4.3.7.
115 Roman law did not recognise the concept of pure nonfeasance: R Evans-Jones & G MacCormack, supra,
n75, at p190.
116 PJ Thomas, Introduction to Roman Law, Kluwer Law and Taxation Publishers, Deventer, Netherlands,
1986, at p125.
117 Inquiry into how the patient died is more appropriate for determining fault than causation.
118 Digest 9.2.4 to 9.2.11 pr.
119 Antony Honoré, personal communication.
120 There is no indication in the Digest whether the surgeon was practising classical Greek medicine or
traditional Roman medicine, which essentially involved use of herbs and domestic remedies.
121 Roman concept of obligation connoted a legal relationship between two individuals under which one
acquired a right and the other the correlative duty. R Evans-Jones & G MacCormack, supra, n75, at
p127.
122 Hippocratic Corpus, The Sacred Disease IX (18); AM Katz, "Evolving Concepts of Heart Failure: Cooling
Furnace, Malfunctioning Pump, Enlarging Muscle" (1997) 3 Journal of Cardiac Failure 319 at 322.
123 "Incise over the third rib, down to the bone, then drill through the rib with a trephine. The perforation
completed, remove a little water and after evacuation, put in a plug of raw flax, and over this a soft
sponge: you must then apply a bandage so that the plug does not fall out. You must take off the water
over a period of twelve days, once daily; ... on the thirteenth [day] evacuate all of the water. For the
remaining time if more water forms, you must remove it." Cited by AM Katz, op cit, n122, at 322.
124 N Laor & J Agassi, supra, n4, at p35.
125 RL Memmler, BJ Cohen & DL Wood, The Human Body in Health and Disease, JB Lippincott Co, New
York, 1992, at p228.
126 In Gray v Motor Accident Commission (1998) 73 ALJR 45, the High Court of Australia accepted that a
case where the defendant deliberately drove his motor car into the plaintiff could be litigated in
negligence.
127 Antony Honoré, personal communication.
128 The High Court of Australia in Nagle v Rottnest Island Authority (1993) 177 CLR 423; [1993] 67 ALJR
426 at 429, stated that: "A risk may constitute a foreseeable risk even though it is unlikely to occur. It
is enough that the risk is not far-fetched or fanciful." Notably, the adjective "reasonable" which used
to accompany the notion of foreseeability was not included in the definition of a foreseeable risk.
129 In the process of determining to whom or to what event responsibility for the plaintiff's injury should
be attributed, the law has regard to both "causing harm" and "enabling others (or other things) to do
harm." See HLA Hart & T Honoré, Causation in the Law, 2nd edn, Clarendon Press, Oxford. 1985, at
p133.
130 McGhee v National Coal Board [1973] 1 WLR 1; cf Wilsher v Essex Area Health Authority [1988] AC
1974; in Australia, see Chappel v Hart (1998) 195 CLR 232; Kavanagh v Akhtar (1998) 45 NSWLR 588.
131 Paulus Iulius, wrote many commentaries, including ad Sabinum, in the first decades of the 3rd century
CE.
132 Sabinus Massurius, contemporary of Augustus, wrote an extensive and systematic treatise on ius civile,
which was commented on by later jurists in works entitled "Ad Sabinum": A Berger, "Encyclopedic
Dictionary of Roman Law" in (1953) 43(2) Transactions of the American Philosophical Society,
Philadelphia, at 687.
133 D.9.31.
134 For example, in Rogers v Whitaker (1992) 175 CLR 479, the High Court of Australia found that the risk
of sympathetic ophthalmia that may occur in one out of 14,000 rarely performed procedures was
foreseeable.