Notes on Contributors
Professor Michael Ashby
Michael Ashby is the Professor of Palliative Care in the Department of Medicine,
Monash University, Director of Palliative Care at McCulloch House, Monash
Medical Centre, and Medical Director of the Cancer and Palliative Care Program
of the Southern Health Care network in Melbourne, Australia. He trained in
general medicine and radiation oncology in the United Kingdom and after
fellowships at the Curie Institute and the Peter McCallum Cancer Institute was
appointed the first Director of Palliative Care at the Royal Adelaide Hospital and
the Mary Potter Hospice, Calvary Hospital, positions which he held until 1995. He
has published on the subjects of ethics of care and decision-making at the end of
life, as well as in the field of clinical pharmacology as it applies to palliative
medicine.
The Honourable Justice Ian Callinan
Ian Callinan was appointed as a judge of the High Court of Australia in February
1998. At the time of his appointment he was a practising Barrister. Justice
Callinan was educated at Brisbane Grammar School and the University of
Queensland. He was called to the Bar in 1965 and subsequently appointed
Queen's Counsel in 1978. He was President of the Queensland Bar Association
between 1984 and 1987 and President of the Australian Bar Association in 1984
and 1985.
Justice Callinan is also a playwright and the author of two novels, a former
Chairman of Trustees of the Queensland Art Gallery, and a former Honorary
Chairman of the Brisbane Community Arts Centre. He was also formerly a
director of a number of leading public companies, as well as a director of the
Australian Broadcasting Corporation, and currently serves as the Chairman of
the Australian Defence Force Academy.
Professor Stephen Cordner
Stephen Cordner graduated in medicine from the University of Melbourne in
1977. After his internship at the Royal Melbourne Hospital, he spent two years in
the Department of Pathology at Geelong Hospital, which was headed by Vernon
Plueckhahn, then Australia's foremost forensic pathologist. In 1981 he took up an
appointment as a Lecturer, and later as a Senior Lecturer, in Forensic Medicine at
Guy's Hospital in London where he stayed until 1987. He worked there with the
Head of the Department, Keith Mant, and with Keith Simpson who, although
retired, was still active in the field. During this period he became a Fellow of the
Royal College of Pathologists of Australasia and gained his membership of the
Royal College of Pathologists of Great Britain. He was appointed Foundation
Professor of Forensic Medicine at Monash University and Foundation Director of
the Victorian Institute of Forensic Medicine in 1987. During his time at Monash,
close links between the Faculties of Medicine and Law have been developed,
reflecting his interest in the interaction generally of these two disciplines.
The Honourable Chief Justice John Doyle
John Doyle was admitted to the degree of Bachelor of Laws from the University
of Adelaide in 1966 and to the degree of Bachelor of Civil Law from Oxford
University in 1969. He was the 1967 Rhodes Scholar for South Australia. He was
admitted as a Barrister and Solicitor of the South Australian Supreme Court in
1970. He was a partner in an Adelaide firm of solicitors from 1970 to 1977. From
1977 until 1986 he practised at the Bar in Adelaide. His work at the Bar involved
most branches of the law, with a substantial involvement in appellate work. He
was appointed a Queen's Counsel in 1981 and in 1986 Solicitor-General of the
State of South Australia. He was appointed Chief Justice of South Australia in
May 1995.
For a number of years he was a part-time Lecturer and Examiner in the
Faculty of Law at the University of Adelaide. From 1972 until 1979 he was a
Member of the Council of the Law Society of South Australia. Chief Justice Doyle
was a Member of the Legal Services Commission of South Australia from its
establishment in 1978 until 1986, and at the time of his appointment as Solicitor-
General he was Chairman of the Commission. He was President of the Bar
Association of South Australia from October 1993 until his appointment as Chief
Justice and had previously served a term as President of that Association from
June 1989 until November 1990.
Dr Gary Edmond
Gary Edmond teaches torts, evidence and expert evidence at the School of Law,
Adelaide University. His research interests include expert evidence, law and
science, the history of evidence law, the public understanding of law and science,
as well as the role of evidence in mass torts and miscarriages of justice. Recently
he was awarded a PhD on Scientific evidence and the construction of guilt and
innocence: Textile evidence in the Azaria Chamberlain case from the Faculty of
Law, University of Cambridge.
Professor Ian Freckelton
Ian Freckelton is a Barrister in full-time private practice in Melbourne, Australia,
having been called to the Bar in 1988. By night, he is also a Professor in the
Department of Psychological Medicine, Adjunct Professor in the Law Faculty and
an Honorary Associate Professor in the Department of Forensic Medicine at
Monash University. He is also the Adjunct Professor of Law and Legal Studies at
La Trobe University, the Vice-President of the International Institute of Forensic
Studies, a Board Member of the Australian Institute of Health, Law and Ethics
and a Past-President of the Australian and New Zealand Association of
Psychiatry, Psychology and Law. He is a member of Victoria's Medical
Practitioners, Psychologists Registration, Psychosurgery and Mental Health
Review Boards. He is the foundation Editor of the Journal of Law and Medicine,
the Editor-in-Chief of Psychiatry, Psychology and Law and an International
Editor of Behavioral Sciences and the Law.
Professor Freckelton is the author and editor of some two dozen books on
health law, compensation law, criminal law, evidence law, coronial law, policing,
psychological profiling and involuntary detention of those with mental illnesses.
Dr Peter Greenberg
Peter Greenberg is the Clinical Director, General Medicine, at the Royal
Melbourne Hospital, and a Principal Fellow in the University of Melbourne
Department of Medicine. He graduated MBBS from Melbourne and undertook
postgraduate studies in General Medicine and Endocrinology at the Royal
Melbourne Hospital, in the University of Melbourne Department of Medicine and
at the Royal Postgraduate Medical School, Hammersmith Hospital, London. Dr
Greenberg works as a consultant general physician in a public hospital and in
private practice, with clinical, teaching and research responsibilities. He has been
President of the Australian Society of Consultant Physicians in General Medicine,
and is currently Quality Convenor for the Royal Australasian College of
Physicians, a Member of the Board of Directors of Western Health, Melbourne
and a Member of the Case Committee of the Medical Indemnity Protection
Society. His professional interests include clinical epidemiology, evidence-based
medicine, and efforts to improve the quality of medical care.
Professor Robert Helme
Robert Helme is a past Director of the National Ageing Research Institute, North
West Hospital, Parkville, Victoria, Professorial Associate, Department of Medicine
of the Royal Melbourne Hospital, and Chairman of the Parkville Campus of the
North West Hospital Special Clinical School. In 1974 he was the Australian-
American Education Foundation Postgraduate Scholar (Fulbright Scheme) at
Harvard University, and in 1984 Alexander von Humboldt Stiftung Fellow at the
University of Heidelberg, West Germany. He is a member of the Faculty of
Medicine, Dentistry and Health Sciences, at the University of Melbourne, has
been President of the Australian Society for Geriatric Medicine, Australian
Association of Neurologists, Behavioural Neurology Committee, Australian
Association of Gerontology, and RM Gibson Scientific Research Fund Committee.
He has worked and published in such fields as pain in the elderly, polymodal
nociceptor function, pain measurement in people with dementia, "brain reserve"
in nervous system physiology and pathology, particularly in relation to dementia
and age-related cognitive decline, and medical education.
Professor Antony Honoré
Antony Honoré, a Fellow of the British Academy, is a legal philosopher, Roman
lawyer and trust lawyer with a South African background. He served in the army
during the Second World War and was severely wounded in the battle of
Alamein. After the war he continued his studies at Oxford University. He has
been teaching and writing about law for more than fifty years, mainly in the
Oxford Law Faculty where he held positions as Regius Professor of Civil Law,
Fellow and Acting Warden of All Souls College, Fellow of Queen's College and
Fellow of New College. Oxford. Professor Honoré has authored Causation in Law
(2nd edition with Herbert Hart), Making the Law Bind – Essays Legal and
Philosophical, The Quest for Security, South African Law of Trusts (4th edition
published in 1992), Ulpian (2nd edition due to be published in 2002), About Law -
An Introduction, Tribonian, Concordance to the Digest Jurists (with Menner),
Emperors and Lawyers, Sex Law, Law in the Crisis of Empire 379-455, and
Responsibility and Fault.
Professor David Lanham
David Lanham is a Professorial Fellow at the University of Melbourne, He was
formerly Assistant Lecturer, Lecturer and Senior Lecturer at Nottingham
University, Visiting Lecturer at Auckland University and Kenneth Bailey
Professor of Law at the University of Melbourne. He is a former Assistant Editor
of Medicine, Science and the Law, Editor of the Criminal Law Review and
Member of the Editorial Board of the Criminal Law Journal. His books include: A
Study Guide to Criminal Law, Practical Forensic Medicine, Criminal Fraud,
Taming Death by Law and Cross-Border Criminal Law. He has published articles
in a variety of journals on such subjects as property, blood tests, organ
transplantation, issue estoppel, self-defence, provocation, felony-murder,
euthanasia, consent to medical treatment, endangerment, accomplice liability,
strict liability, vicarious liability and liability of corporations. He taught criminal
law at the University of Melbourne from 1975 to 2000.
Professor Harold Luntz
Harold Luntz has been teaching in the Law School at the University of
Melbourne since 1965. From 1986 to 1988 he was Dean of the Faculty of Law. He
was educated in South Africa and at Oxford University. Professor Luntz is the
author of Assessment of Damages for Personal Injury and Death (4th edition, in
press), principal author of Torts: Cases and Commentary (5th edition, in
preparation), and General Editor of the Torts Law Journal, which is now in its
ninth year of publication. For several years he has taught a postgraduate course
on Common Law Obligations of Health Professionals. In 2000 he was the
inaugural recipient of the John G Fleming Memorial Award for Torts Scholarship.
Associate Professor Eric Magnusson
Eric Magnusson teaches in the School of Chemistry at the University College of
the Australian Defence Force Academy of the University of New South Wales. It
was for this University that he first taught and from which, in 1957, he was one
of the first PhD graduates. In the same year he went to the University of London
as an 1851 Exhibitioner, rubbing shoulders with the researchers using that
University's first mainframe computer to refine the structure of DNA. He used it
for computations in molecular quantum mechanics, his major research field, but
he is equally fascinated by the study of science and the law. Associate Professor
Magnusson is currently preparing for the first direct investigation of how courts
with untrained jurors assess forensic science evidence in Australian criminal
trials.
The Honourable Chief Justice David Malcolm
David Malcolm was appointed Chief Justice of Western Australia in 1988. In 1990
he was also appointed Lieutenant Governor of Western Australia. He was the
Rhodes Scholar from Western Australia in 1960, and obtained a BCL with first
class honours at Oxford in 1962. He was Chairman of the Law Reform
Commission of Western Australia in 1976 and then from 1979 to 1982. During the
same period, he was also a member of the Copyright Tribunal. He was Queen's
Counsel from 1980 to 1988, President of the Western Australian Bar Association
from 1981 to 1984 and Vice-Chairman of the Australian Bar Association in 1984.
Since 1991 he has been the Chairman of the Judicial Section of the Law
Association for Asia and the Pacific. He is the Chairman of the Advisory Board of
the Crime Research Centre at the University of Western Australia, President of
the Western Australian branch of the International Commission of Jurists and a
Member of the Board of Directors of the Society for the Reform of Criminal Law.
The Honourable Justice Keith Mason
Keith Mason is President of the New South Wales Court of Appeal. He was
appointed Queen's Counsel in 1981 and practised at the Sydney Bar as a private
practitioner until 1985, when he was appointed Chairman of the New South
Wales Law Reform Commission. Apart from general oversight and participation
in all reports, he was the principal writer of reports on Recovery of Payments
Made under Mistake of Law and Wills: Execution and Revocation. Between 1987
and 1997, as Solicitor General for New South Wales he acted as the Senior
Counsel and principal non-political legal adviser to the New South Wales
Government and its instrumentalities. In his position, he represented New South
Wales in many constitutional, criminal and civil cases in the appellate courts and
in the High Court of Australia. He has published articles in Australian law
journals, contributed chapters to books on restitution, law and government,
morals and religious values in the Australian legal system, and co-authored the
Australian Law of Restitution, published in 1995.
Dr Danuta Mendelson
Danuta Mendelson is a Senior Lecturer at the School of Law at Deakin
University. She received MA, PhD and LLM degrees from Monash University. She
is a joint Editor (Legal Issues) for the Journal of Law and Medicine. Dr Mendelson
has authored books on Metaphor in IE Babel's Short Stories, published in 1982,
Interfaces of Medicine and Law: The History of the Liability for Negligently
Caused Psychiatric Injury (Nervous Shock), published in 1998, and Torts, which
won the 1997 Australian Award (joint) for Excellence in Academic Publishing
(3rd edition, in preparation). Her articles on the law of consent and refusal of
treatment, medical duty of confidentiality, withdrawal and withholding of
medical treatment, palliative care and euthanasia, the "right to die" legislation,
malingering and the function of expert medical witnesses, the law of rescue, and
constitutional aspects of medical practice have appeared in Australian and
international refereed journals.
David Mercer
David Mercer is a Senior Lecturer in the Science and Technology Studies Program
at the University of Wollongong. He has taught across a wide variety of subjects
ranging from the History and Philosophy of Science to Science and Technology
Policy. He has published in a number of leading science studies journals,
including Social Studies of Science, Public Understanding of Science, Science
Communication, Science as Culture, Prometheus, Social Epistemology and
Metascience. His research interests include the interaction of law and science,
sociology of science, public understanding of science and science policy. He is
currently writing on the EMF and mobile telephone debate and the uses and
abuses of epidemiology in legal and regulatory settings. He is also currently a
member of the editorial board of the international science studies "review
journal" Metascience.
Professor Ralph Slovenko
Ralph Slovenko is Professor of Law and Psychiatry at Wayne State University in
Michigan, He received BE, LLB, MA, and PhD degrees from Tulane University.
He was Editor-in-Chief of the Tulane Law Review, and a varsity sports letterman
at Tulane University. He served as Law Clerk to the Louisiana Supreme Court,
and as Senior Assistant District Attorney under Jim Garrison in New Orleans. He
was a Fulbright Scholar to France, and a Professor of Law at Tulane University
from 1954 to 1964. He was also a member of the faculty of the Tulane University
Department of Psychiatry and Neurology. At the invitation of Dr Robert G
Heath, Chairman of the Tulane University Department of Psychiatry and
Neurology, he did a residency in psychiatry, one of two persons to do so without
a medical degree.
Professor Slovenko held a joint appointment, from 1965 to 1968, at the
Menninger Foundation and at the University of Kansas School of Law. Since then,
he has been at Wayne State University. He has lectured widely in the United
States and also in Australia, Canada, France, Israel, Japan, Russia (Soviet Union),
and South Africa. He was Visiting Professor in South Africa in 1976 and 1989, and
he occupied the Rood Eminent Scholar Chair in 1991 at the University of Florida
College of Law. He is a frequent visitor to Poland, Russia, and South Africa, and
has written extensively about them. He has frequently served as an expert
witness. Professor Slovenko is a Member of the American, Kansas, Louisiana, and
Michigan Bar Associations, and a scientific associate of the American Academy
of Psychoanalysis and amicus of the American Academy of Psychiatry and Law.
He is the author of numerous books and articles. His book Psychiatry and Law
received the Manfred Guttmacher award of the American Psychiatric Association
and was a selection of the Behavioral Science Book Club. He is also the author of
Psychiatry and Criminal Culpability, published in 1950 and of Psychotherapy and
Confidentiality, published in 1998, as well as a number of other books.
Professor Dennis Smith
Dennis Smith was the Director of Rehabilitation at the Clinical Research Centre
of the Medical Research Council in Harrow, England, before emigrating to South
Australia in 1979. During this time he was, for a decade, engaged in clinical
research and the development of appropriate outcome measures designed to
determine the effectiveness of rehabilitation. He was the Foundation Professor of
Rehabilitation Medicine at Flinders University, and the Repatriation General
Hospital, from 1979 to 1992. He was President of the Faculty of Rehabilitation in
1994. In 1992 he established the Sydney University Motor Accidents Authority
Chair of Rehabilitation at Ryde, and Royal North Shore Hospital. Professor Smith
spent a sabbatical year in 1997 at Salisbury and Southampton as a Visiting
Professor and has now returned to Flinders University in South Australia.
Professor Smith has considerable experience in the clinical management and
rehabilitation of stroke and head injury, on which he has been an invited speaker
at international conferences. He has written extensively on the determinants of
disability He also has a continuing interest in the management of chronic pain
syndromes affecting the back and neck, especially for those in which the
consequence is an inability to return to work. Professor Smith is currently a
consultant at the Griffith Rehabilitation Hospital in South Australia.
Professor Jane Stapleton
Jane Stapleton is currently a Professor within the Law Program of the Research
School of Social Sciences at the Australian National University. She is also a
Statutory Visiting Professor at Oxford University. Originally trained as a scientist,
she resigned a postdoctoral post at Cambridge to study law, first at the Australian
National University then at Oxford University. From 1987 to 1997 she was a
Fellow in Law at Balliol College (where she remains a Fellow) and reached the
position of Reader within the University of Oxford. She has held Visiting
Professorships in the United States and at the European University Institute. Her
interests cover the law of obligations, liability and compensation systems,
ranging from product liability to philosophical foundations of the common law
such as causation, duty and good faith. Her works include Disease and the
Compensation Debate, published in 1986, and Product Liability, published in 1994.
She has acted as consultant in major commercial, pharmaceutical and medical
litigation in the United Kingdom, United States and Australia.
Associate Professor David Wells
David Wells is the Head of Clinical Forensic Medicine at the Victorian Institute of
Forensic Medicine and Honorary Associate Professor of Forensic Medicine at
Monash University. His other appointments include being Honorary Physician at
the Child Protection Unit, Royal Children's Hospital, Melbourne, Honorary
Specialist to the Sexual Assault Service, Royal Women's Hospital, Melbourne, and
Visiting Specialist, Child Protection Unit, Monash Medical Centre.
Associate Professor Wells is an Examiner in Medical Jurisprudence for the
Society of Apothecaries of London, a Board Member of the Australian Drug
Foundation, a Member of the Advisory Panel, National Institute of Forensic
Science, and a Member of the International Editorial Board of the Journal of
Clinical Forensic Medicine. His professional interests cover the full span of
clinical forensic medicine but current activities are centred on non-accidental
injury of children, sexual assault, injury interpretation and medical education. He
is coordinator of the Monash University postgraduate program in forensic
medicine.