Introduction
DANUTA MENDELSON AND IAN FRECKELTON
Analysis of causation underpins both medical and legal practice, just as it
pervades day-to-day functioning by members of the general community. Doctors,
lawyers and people generally adopt rules of thumb and function on the basis of
both assumptions and expectations in relation to what has caused things and
what is likely to generate results in the future. Within clinical and research
medical practice, though, causation in the form of aetiology or diagnostic or
prognostic process is governed by rules and cultural norms that are significantly
at variance with those prevalent within the legal system when it focuses upon the
making of litigation findings.
Under the law, the imperative of dichotomous decision-making constantly
requires determinations of causation. The law is often not particularly interested
in influences, impacts, or relationships. In criminal law, civil law, even coronial
law, the question posed is whether an act has been proved to have caused or to be
likely to cause something else. Because decision-making requires a finding about
whether a fundamental issue such as causation is proved or not proved, the
existence or non-existence of proof of causation is consistently fundamental to
the outcome of litigation. It is surprising then that the law has struggled for so
long with not just what constitutes "causation" but with how it cart be proved.
This has resulted in a series of different tests, rules and procedures, making
evaluation of litigants' prospects of success difficult and hard to explain to
persons from a non-legal background.
A particular aspect of the difficulty is that "causation" often means different
things to representatives of different professions; this has impacted adversely
upon the success of the law's search for resolution of different strands of thinking
about causation. This book grapples with the conceptual complexities in a
selection of different forensic contexts, employing perspectives from leading
thinkers in medical, scientific, philosophical and jurisprudential backgrounds in
an effort to locate both reconciliation and principles that can be applied across
different categories of dispute.
The book includes medical/scientific contributions and legal contributions. The
legal chapters identify and discuss conceptual uncertainties embedded in the
substantive law of causation and evidentiary and procedural principles that
govern the forensic process involving medico-legal issues. The medical chapters
define pertinent issues of aetiology and pathogenesis, the nature of proof in
medicine, the concept of evidence-based medicine, and issues of medical
morality. The book is divided into five parts.
In part A, which examines different understandings of causation in law,
medicine and science, the authors focus on particular aspects of this concept.
Tony Honoré points out that since inquiries into the processes by which things
happen, or have happened, are predicated on the concept of cause, the notion of
causation, in the sense of objectivity, regularity and the possibility of cognition, is
the same in law, medicine, science and everyday life. To establish a causal
connection between events presents greater difficulty in the organic (including
the medical) sphere than in the inorganic, purely physical, owing to the greater
complexity of organic processes. The problem confronting the law is that of
striking a balance which takes account of the complexity of organic processes and
is at the same time fair to the wrongdoer. At their jurisprudential core, causation
and legal liability are linked by the notion of responsibility for good or bad
outcomes of human conduct.
The application in Hippocratic medicine and the Roman law of delict of the
Aristotelian theory of efficient or triggering and latent causes is discussed by
Mendelson. The relationship between efficient causes (that can be determined on
the basis of factual evidence drawn from sensory observation and experience),
and the latent or underlying causes (which explain scientifically or
philosophically why something has happened) is as controversial today as it was
in classical Greece and Rome, though the language of the discourse may be
different. In the modern common law of negligence, the causal connection
between the defendant's wrongful act and the plaintiff's harm is considered to be
one of the elements essential to the attribution of legal responsibility.
Stapleton analyses conceptual implications of the rejection by the common law
courts of causation as a scientific and philosophical concept in cases where there
exists the so-called "evidentiary gap" in relation to past facts or about the weight
to place on agreed facts in issue. Stapleton suggests that in such cases the courts
should recognise the dispute as revolving around competing views of legal
responsibility. Consequently, the courts should refuse to accept a formulation as
being about "causation" and "causal tests", and instead insist that the parties argue
directly about the issues of policy and principle relevant to the question of
responsibility, If adopted by the courts, this approach would mean that other
approaches to causation, including the modern scientific and medical models of
causation, would be able to enter the arena of legal discourse. Mendelson is less
certain, arguing that whereas modern medicine has developed scientific
methodology to discover many causes, which Hippocratic medicine classified as
"latent" or underlying causes, modern jurisprudence has failed to develop an
equivalent legal methodology of ascertaining causal origins of wrongful events.
Greenberg explains how causal methodology works within the model of
"evidence-based" medicine whereby a cause is linked with a particular condition
if a number of preconditions are satisfied. These preconditions include data
gathered from statistical studies showing that the cause in question precedes the
physiological or psychological outcome; that this cause/outcome association is
consistent across time as well as patient groups and settings; that the
cause/outcome relationship is biologically plausible, by demonstrating, for
example, that there exists a relationship between the likelihood or severity of
disease and the magnitude of the cause and that this relationship is independent
of observational study bias. Yet the scientific methodology is far from fail-proof,
for, as Greenberg demonstrates, "even when group studies show unequivocal
relationships between causal factors and disease, it may be difficult to extrapolate
conclusions to individuals", which, of course, is what the courts have to
determine in medico-legal litigation. At the same time, taking up the strands of
Stapleton's exposition, Greenberg notes that lay, including legal, perceptions
about medical causation depend partly on scientific and technological knowledge
of the time and partly on philosophical, cultural, religious, political and
sociological beliefs that "frame" the questions which are asked about the illness or
disease.
Edmond and Mercer analyse the relationship between medical and scientific
approaches to causation on the one hand and those found in legal settings on the
other. They observe that the law tends to place greater emphasis on the
apportionment of responsibility and explaining specific instances – the case at
hand – rather than, as is often the case in science where the tendency is to make
generalisations, about classes of relationships. However, they maintain that
findings of a legal causation have social implications and should not be
approached as a "simplistic or textbook-style" set of definitions and comparisons.
They argue that decision-makers should strategically construct images of
scientific and legal causation drawing from a variety of epistemic domains, policy
considerations and practical contingencies. Specifically addressing what
constructively can be done to ease the task of decision-makers, they argue that
attempts to initiate change need to be systemic. In particular, the changes need to
assist decision-makers' and witnesses' ability to marshal resources effectively.
Part B focuses on different aspects of causation in the law of torts. Callinan
examines judicial approaches to tests of causation, chronicling the climate of
disagreement amongst the judiciary, legal commentators and the community
about not only how rules of causation and responsibility should be applied, but
even what rules should apply, particularly in such difficult factual situations as
palliative care. He queries whether there is a tendency for lawyers to believe that
all is controllable; that scientific development has replaced biological uncertainty.
He notes the tension between the law's demarcation between lawful palliative
care and unlawful homicide on the basis of the intention of the medical
profession administering the treatment. Determination of causation in this
context raises fundamental ethical and legal problems, which are yet to be
resolved. That uncertainty, however, must inevitably result in very difficult
decisions regarding responsibility of medical practitioners practising in the fieid.
The theme of cause and legal responsibility discussed by Honoré from a
jurisprudential and philosophical perspective is further examined by Mason, who
concentrates on the "staggering march" of negligence. This cause of action has
opened up new areas of responsibility for omissions, careless advice, pure
psychiatric injury and pure economic loss. In particular, Mason examines judicial
application of the notion that tort law is an instrument of corrective justice and
that negligence at common law is still a fault-based system (though he also
provides case law instances where principles of distributive justice have been
influential). He argues that until recently the extent of the tortfeasor's moral
responsibility has usually been explained through the concept of causation with
control devices such as effective cause, remoteness of damage and novus actus
interveniens. However, although causation principles continue to occupy a central
role in the resolution of litigation, they have been affected by the need for greater
transparency in enunciating reasons for the "hard" choices in tort liability. Like
Stapleton, Mason argues that although the courts tend to emphasise that
questions of causation are not answered in a legal vacuum, their approach
remains normative and impressionistic.
One of the "hard choices" in torts law, which also involves the issue of
"evidentiary gap" is the loss of chance doctrine, discussed by a number of authors
in different contexts. Luntz analyses the caselaw relating to this doctrine in the
context of medical negligence litigation which would allow compensation where
the only loss involves the loss of a chance at a favourable opportunity to have a
medical condition treated at an early stage or of a chance of avoiding a
detrimental event, such as the possibility of a cure. Luntz argues that loss or
diminution of such chance, when caused by a medical practitioner's negligence,
should be compensable, irrespective of whether the chance was greater or less
than even, as long as it was more than speculative. This should be so despite the
fact that whereas damages for past and present events which the parties allege
are proved on the balance of probabilities (to have or to have not occurred), a loss
of chance, is at best a hypothetical event, which could only be established as a
possibility. Admittedly, the but for test of causation involves a hypothetical
question of what would have happened had the defendant not been negligent in
an identical set of circumstances. Whether obtaining damages for a loss of a
hypothetical event can be equated with a test which utilises hypothetical
reasoning, and which is not the sole test of causation, is another question.
Another issue relating to the loss of chance doctrine which the courts are yet
to resolve concerns the effective inversion of legal causation in negligence by
shifting the legal burden of proof from the plaintiff, who traditionally is required
to establish that the defendant's breach of duty of care had caused or materially
contributed to his or her injury, to the defendant who has to prove not the
absence of a legal nexus between the breach and injury but the absence of such
nexus between the breach and the loss of a chance. This means that the
defendant is expected to disprove a negative, namely that the breach of duty did
not deprive the plaintiff of a chance not to suffer loss or of a possibility to
minimise that loss. This is a question explored by Freckelton in the Epilogue to
the book. In his chapter, Smith develops Greenberg's analysis of causation in the
medical context by analysing the complex relationship between aetiology and
perceptions in the context of pain and injury in cases of low back pain – a
compensable injury that is often at the centre of forensic controversy in torts
litigation.
In Part C Lanham explains that the approach of the criminal law to
determination of liability for causing death involves asking two questions: first, is
there a factual link between the defendant's conduct and the victim's death;
secondly, is the link sufficiently substantial to make the defendant's conduct the
cause of death? The factual link is sometimes described as the but for
requirement or causa sine qua non test. According to this test, causation is
established if the death would not have occurred but for the act of the defendant.
Conceptual and jurisprudential difficulties in the application of the but for test in
torts and in criminal law have long been recognised. Lanham provides a number
of examples where the but for test would result in acquittal, yet a wider analysis
would suggest the presence of a causative link. Even if the factual link is
established, the law has to test whether that link is sufficiently strong to attribute
the death to the defendant's action. Lanham questions the appeal to common
sense in resolving issues of causation, noting that although it is true that common
sense or sound judgement will need to be applied in assessing any matters of
degree in which the legal tests present, it is neither a substitute for these tests nor
does it provide an independent legal test. Lanham analyses different tests of
causation, which include the general formula that to found liability a cause must
be a substantial and operating cause; special sub-rules; and the issues of
intention, foresight and foreseeability. He argues that the formula of "substantial
and operating cause" is deficient in capturing the basic principle in causation, for
there must be a point at which a cause is still operating but is so insubstantial
that it should not result in liability. At the same time, a cause cannot be
substantial unless it is operating. This was the issue that the Roman jurists found
difficult to resolve. Lanham argues that in the case where there is an original
injury and a second and more direct cause of the death, like poor medical
treatment, only if that second cause is so overwhelming as to make the original
wound part of the history can it be said that death does not flow from the
wound.
The question whether the underlying illness or palliative care involving
administration of high doses of opioid medication should be regarded as a cause
of death, examined by Callinan from the perspective of criminal law, is analysed
by Ashby from the point of view of a physician. Ashby notes that dialogue
between medicine and the law is hampered by the fact that the term "causation"
is usually employed in medicine and science in a narrow empirical sense,
whereas in law causation is a complex phenomenon which encompasses the facts
and determination of legal liability. Most people without a legal background, and
hence most health care practitioners, will have first resort to the medical view of
causation, which approximates to the but for test of causation without the over-
arching test of common sense and experience.
Like Stapleton and Greenberg, Ashby discusses the issues of perceptions and
framing, but he does so in relation to death causation in palliative care. He asks
why medicine itself has failed to deal with ethical and legal problems of
causation in this context, and discusses such reasons as the anxieties experienced
by physicians about responsibility for causing death, as well as questionable
assumptions by health care professionals and the public concerning the
established international medico-legal view of palliative care interventions and
death causation. Ashby demonstrates that many doctors still believe that they are
causing or hastening the death of their palliative care patients by the
administration of pain-controlling medication, despite the absence of any clinical
scientific evidence that morphine causes death, if used with appropriate skill to
palliate symptoms.
Palliative care is an excellent example of the inadequacy of the operative cause
test as the sole determinant of legal causation, for, as Callinan and Ashby point
out, it leaves out the issue of intention. Whilst a doctor's therapeutic intention
may not always be easy to validate, evaluation of intention and motive are
fundamental to legal analysis, and many would argue that intention is also
determinative of the moral character of medical interventions. According to
Ashby, the notion that there is agreement about a "high" dose of an opioid drug
such as morphine beyond which timing and possibly causation might be in
question has permeated medicine and found legal reflection in the 1957
instruction to the jury by (later) Lord Devlin in R v Adams. Ashby argues that
although incorporation of the double-effect doctrine into the legal system is
supportive of palliative care, much has changed in medicine (and society) since
1957. He discusses the deficiencies of the "double-effect" doctrine when viewed
from the medical perspective.
Malcolm also critically analyses different legal bases for Lord Devlin's doctrine
of "double effect". He examines various judicial interpretations of this doctrine,
including its consideration as a discrete legal precedent in the form of a test that
focuses on the defendant's intention rather than a causal link, or a specific
principle of causation. Again, he demonstrates how the determination of causal
link for death that occurs following administration of high doses of pain-relieving
drugs will depend on a particular interpretation of the doctrine that the court
adopts.
Another aspect of medical treatment where the issue of causation may arise
involves refusal of life-saving or life-sustaining treatment. Malcolm discusses the
approaches of North American, English and Australian courts to the right of a
competent adult to refuse life-saving or life-sustaining treatment and doctors'
liability for causing death, noting that the acceptance of this "right" in the law of
tort may also provide an excuse at criminal law. As he puts it, where competent
patients who have been fully informed of available treatment options refuse to
give consent, medical practitioners are relieved of their duty to these patients.
This principle is particularly significant in the context of the criminal sanctions
that apply to an omission to provide such treatment, for in the absence of a duty
to the patient, a medical practitioner may not be held liable for his or her failure
to provide "necessaries".
While Malcolm's discussion of liability of doctors for omissions and positive
acts relating to withholding or withdrawal of medical treatment and life supports
is predicated on the assumption that the refusing patient is a competent adult,
Helme and Mendelson examine medical aspects of competency in relation to
patients with Alzheimer's Dementia. This condition has profound implications for
questions of decisional competence not only with regard to refusal and
withdrawal of medical treatment, but also to issues of competence and decisional
capacity relating to inter vivos and testamentary dispositions in the context of the
equitable doctrines of unconscionability and undue influence. When severe, the
diagnosis of dementia is easily made. In its earliest stages, however, even the
most skilled clinicians remain unsure. Yet, it is at this relatively early stage that
many elderly persons make decisions both about their health and their wealth.
Helme and Mendelson query the appropriateness of applying a strict cognitive
test to persons with Alzheimer's Dementia, and point out problems with medical
and legal assessment of competence. This makes the task of those concerned with
the judgement of competence particularly difficult when in issue is the refusal of
life-saving treatment and exercise of the "right to die".
In cases of persons diagnosed with dementia, their inter vivos and
testamentary dispositions may be open to challenge on the ground that, due to
"defective faculties", the disposing or transacting party was incapable of
understanding their significance and purpose. Alternatively, dementia may be
pleaded as the cause of the inability of the disposing party to consider his or her
best interests, and the unfair exploitation of this circumstance by the defendant.
Yet, the issues involved are much more complex. Helme and Mendelson argue
that considerable care must be taken in making judgements based on personal or
strictly juridical interpretations of observed behaviour. Rather, these behaviours
should be interpreted from the subjective point of view of the affected person's
brain and in the context of his or her social and personal situation.
Part D of the book grapples with issues concerning death and injury
investigation, again from both a medical and a legal perspective. Cordner
describes the role of the forensic autopsy conducted by pathologists. He contrasts
the Hume and Mills approaches and examines a variety of circumstances in
which the causes of death are indirect, multiple and complex. He notes too that
on occasions determination of causation of death from a medical point of view is
entirely dependent upon circumstances. He contends that if there is operating at
the time of death a disease or condition capable itself of causing or accelerating
death, and in the circumstances of the particular death its effects apparently
exerted themselves, then the disease or condition should be regarded as part of
the cause of that person's death. Cordner also argues that if a disease or condition
(whether or not a potentially fatal condition) aggravates or complicates another
disease or condition (whether or not a potentially fatal condition) such that death
occurs, then both diseases or conditions should generally be viewed as part of the
cause of death.
Wells addresses the issue of causation within the clinical forensic medicine
context. He recognises that a range of factors is capable of contaminating the
accurate assessment of the factors that, for instance, have caused injuries or that
provide evidence in relation to sexual assaults upon either adults or children
having taken place.
Freckelton analyses coronial law to evaluate whether it has evolved its own
distinctive jurisprudence in relation to causation. In the context of contending
that causation assessment is intrinsically context-dependent, he argues that the
orientation of modern coronial law toward findings that have a potential for
avoiding avoidable death has affected the tests employed for causation at
inquests. He argues that there is considerable social merit in causation being
viewed broadly within the coronial context, thereby encouraging investigation of
both direct and indirect factors that have brought about deaths, fires and other
phenomena involving risk to the community.
Part E deals with a number of different issues of causation as they manifest in
forensic practice. Slovenko deals with the complex series of areas where
psychiatric evidence seeks to assist courts in understanding causation issues in
relation to mental health. He divides his chapter into sections dealing with
behaviour that takes place as a result of mental illness, and mental illness that
ensues as a result of a stressor. He poses the question: what does it mean to say
that certain behaviour is a product or a feature of mental illness? He concludes
that the terms used by legislatures and courts such as "product of", "a result of",
"causal connection", "because of", "causative factor" are unsatisfying and
impenetrable. He reviews a series of psychiatric theories about why people act in
ways which may bring them into contact with the criminal justice system and
argues that behaviour is a unitary process, but, with licence, it is spoken of in
terms of either its subjective elements or its outward appearances. This can be
like talking about the mind and body as though they had separate existence; we
do it, he contends, because we do not have language expressive of continuous
interactions with multiple or circular causality. He argues that the decision of
whether behaviour is a "product" or a "result" of mental illness is not a matter of
scientific expertise but a matter of social policy.
In analysing "psychiatric injury" Slovenko traces the evolution in the attitudes
of United States courts toward the phenomenon, as well as the evolving thinking
of psychiatry, in particular in relation to post-traumatic stress disorder ("PTSD").
He reviews another attribute of modern litigation involving mental health
matters, the syndrome phenomenon, which is often associated with PTSD. He
argues that in the law-psychiatry relationship, public policy plays a major role in
determining whether certain kinds of behaviour will be considered to be the
result of mental illness, or whether mental illness will be considered to be the
result of a particular stressor.
Like Callinan, but from a different perspective, Doyle analyses the tests for
causation in tort. He argues that "a function", or perhaps "the function", of the
concept of causation in negligence, is to define the outer limits of harm or loss
suffered by other persons for which the defendant may be held liable, if found to
have been negligent. He locates the law's interest in causation in the civil context
in the need to allocate legal responsibility for harm or damage suffered by a
plaintiff. He makes the point that the making of a finding of causation gives rise
also to a number of other considerations which can have significant
consequences beyond the decision between the immediate parties. He argues that
it is legitimate to take into account these other considerations when considering
the soundness of the concept. Doyle reviews Australian law in relation to
causation in the contexts of failure to advise and failure to warn of risks. He
observes that the "but for" test and the common sense tests will continue to test
the courts in particular applications.
Magnusson develops an aspect of Doyle's chapter by analysing a crucial aspect
of proof of causation in a forensic setting – that sought to be done by the use of
statistics. Statistical reasoning is employed increasingly frequently in the forensic
context, in two ways – by the explicit presentation of statistical argument and,
more broadly, by taking advantage of the conceptual approach inherent in
statistical reasoning. Magnusson comments that statistical methods allow
scientists and engineers to apply common sense to data that, like data of any
other kind, are inexact. He accepts though that the potential for
misunderstanding statistical proof of causation is substantial and illustrates the
risk of mis-estimation by a series of worrying examples. He argues that the
challenge for the courts is to ease the task for decision-makers by making
statistical reasoning more accessible.
In his Epilogue, Freckelton analyses a selection of issues that occur at the
practical end of forensic assessment of causation. He argues that many of these
issues arise out of expert evidence. Some are statistical, as outlined by
Magnusson; others go to the capacity of decision-makers to apply the kinds of
tests outlined by Doyle. The evidence given by patients that had they been
properly informed of the potentially adverse consequences of medical
intervention, they would not have undergone it, can be particularly problematic.
The role of hindsight revision can be substantial, whether an objective, subjective
or modified subjective test is utilised. Freckelton argues that broad notions of
"common sense" pose significant difficulties for decision-makers when they have
to decide whether an act caused an outcome or might at some stage in the future
produce an outcome.
Freckelton also discusses a number of difficult dilemmas faced by decision-
makers when they have to evaluate epidemiological evidence, evidence about the
aetiology of currently suffered psychiatric conditions and evidence about
conditions that may have multiple aetiologies or that were prodromal at the time
of a tortious or criminal act. Fie argues that difficulties exist both in criminal and
tort law, resulting in a need for consistency and guidance for decision-makers if
the sheer complexity of causation assessment in practice is not to retreat into
impressionistic and unreliable fact-finding.
The book therefore is cross-disciplinary and views issues concerning causation
through a number of different Senses. It does not purport to provide an
overarching "solution" to the complexities faced by the courts when dealing with
causation evidence. Its concentration is upon identifying difficulties and
incompatibilities amongst the approaches of different disciplines to causation and
upon grappling with what these differences and lack of conceptual consistency
mean for the practical conduct of litigation. We are convinced that the integrity
and regard in which the law is held within the general community depend upon
its being responsive, and being seen to be responsive, to the values and enriching
approaches of other disciplines. This book airs those values and approaches, while
commencing the process of exploring how, consistently with its own objectives,
the law can draw upon them in defining causation and how causation is
established within the legal domain. In this regard, Causation in Law and
Medicine is a beginning, not an end.