7 Fault, Causation and Responsibility: Is
Tort Law Just an Instrument of
Corrective Justice?
KEITH MASON*
You look at where you're going and where you are and it never makes sense, but then you look back to
where you've been and a pattern seems to emerge. And if you project forward from that pattern, then
sometimes you can come up with something.1
Like the Irish jury that were unanimous that they could not agree, the High Court
of Australia laboured mightily in Perre v Apand Pty Ltd2 before recognising lack
of consensus or even a majority position about the essentials of the action in
negligence for pure economic loss. Only Kirby J saw merit in the three stage
framework favoured in England. Their Honours agreed that the animal exists.
But proximity was rejected as a useful taxonomic guide. General reliance is no
longer generally relied on by the hunters. The creature could not be identified by
its foreseeability spots, but its known vulnerability was proposed as a working
hypothesis.3
The lack of agreement is hardly surprising. The framework of modern tort law
is elusive, perhaps inherently protean. Maybe Cooke P was correct in his gloomy
prognostication that:
Ultimately the exercise can only be a balancing one and the important object is that all relevant factors
be weighed. There is no escape from the truth that, whatever formula be used, the outcome in a grey area
case has to be determined by judicial judgment. Formulae can help to organise thinking but they cannot
provide answers.4
Whether a new age of certainty will dawn in the High Court is unknown. In
the meantime, the decision to proceed slowly and see what turns up was
inevitable. It is hardly unprecedented. Even Sir Owen Dixon once confided to
Chief Justice Latham:5
In [s92] cases relating to transport ... I think it is almost clear that we must proceed by arbitrary methods.
No doubt there will be limits but political and economic considerations will guide the instinct of the
Court chiefly. In time the thing will work back to some principle or doctrine.
Perhaps Sir Owen had tongue in cheek, recognising the need for himself to
mark time to allow his arbitrary brethren time to fall into line with his own clear
logic.6
Very recently, in Crimmins v Stevedoring Industry Finance Committee,7
McHugh J warned that incremental development by analogy must be rooted in
principle and policy. Frank discussion about policy factors must not abandon the
search for a linking chain of reasoning. His Honour stressed the merits of
predictability and sought to confine the uncertainties of Perre to cases of pure
economic loss. It may not be reading too much into his judgment to see it as a
plea to his brethren not to revisit well-established areas of tort law in the quest to
find and apply principles of general application.8
The concepts of "fault" and "responsibility" are part of the landscape of modern
tort law, but they usually lie hidden. "Responsibility" covers a wide spectrum. It
does not necessarily import legal liability or moral blame, although it is a
condition of both. As Professor Honoré points out, human responsibility may
relate to (a) our own conduct, (b) the responsibility that we choose to take on for
other people, things and events; and (c) the responsibility that society thrusts
upon us.9 I shall confine myself to the field of legal responsibility as reflected in
the law of tort, principally the expanding field of negligence. That area is more
than large enough. Professor Honoré's three aspects of responsibility are still
relevant. They remind us that liability may stem from omissions as well as acts,
including the acts or omissions of a third party. And they show the fallacy of
limiting duty of care to "assumption" of an obligation to control a person or
situation.
The general rule is that a plaintiff bears the onus of proof on all matters.10
Proving liability is one thing, getting all of the damages claimed is another.
Academic lawyers tend to concentrate on the former. Practitioners and judges
spend most of their time dealing with the latter. Many injured plaintiffs come
with a history of other problems or acquire one after the tortious injury and
before trial. The task of segregating the loss actually stemming from the tort may
be complex and problematic. It is generally true that the tortfeasor takes the
victim as found, but it is certainly not the corollary that the court ignores the
victim's antecedent incapacities or potential disabilities and illnesses when
assessing damages.11 Nor does the victim get reparation for every loss stemming
however remotely from the wrongdoer's fault. Many factual and legal issues
require unravelling.
In Perre, McHugh J propounded the theses that tort law is "an instrument of
corrective justice";12 and that "negligence at common law is still a fault-based
system".13
McHugh J's references to the law of tort being an instrument of corrective
justice draw attention to a sophisticated debate occurring in North America.14 At
the broadest level, this theory sees tort law as grounded upon "correlativity",
requiring those who have harmed others without justification to put the matter
right by reparation (damages), specific relief (eg return of a detained chattel) or
other means (eg an apology). It requires proof of harm done to the plaintiff for
which the defendant bears some causal responsibility.
But the wrongdoer may be impossible to identify or not worth suing. Exclusive
adherence to corrective justice principles is not good enough for plaintiffs who go
in search of "peripheral" parties.15 An American newspaper headline summed it
up:
Can't sue the person who hurt you? Don't sulk. Hire a personal-injury lawyer and sue someone else.
Corrective justice does not fully explain the rules of tort.16 Even within
negligence, the silent but insistent demands of distributive justice may enlarge
liability, for example by imposing strict or near strict liability upon classes of
persons involved in risky undertakings or by favouring liability against insured
defendants.17 Conversely, they may restrict liability, for example by control
devices in the field of nervous shock, that are difficult to justify in principle.18
The highway non-feasance rule cannot be explained except according to
principles of distributive justice.
Recently the House of Lords has given explicit recognition to distributive
justice principles as reasons for limiting tort liability. Frost v Chief Constable of
South Yorkshire19 involved claims by police officers with respect to psychiatric
injury suffered after helping victims at the Hillsborough disaster where 96
spectators were crushed to death at a soccer match. The negligence of the officers'
employer was held insufficient to ground recovery for pure psychiatric injury.20
Their Lordships expressed concern about the impact of a litigation explosion in
this area, including concern about the burden of damages and the impact upon
crowded court lists. It is also clear that they recognised the difficulty of justifying
how it would be fair to award compensation to police officers when it had
already been refused to family members of those killed or maimed at the
disaster.21 Lord Hoffmann referred to competing proposals to scrap all "control
mechanisms" in relation to psychiatric damage or alternatively to abolish
recovery for psychiatric injury altogether. He continued:22
The appeal of these two opposing proposals rather depends upon where one starts from. If one starts
from the proposition that in principle the law of torts is there to give legal force to an Aristotelian system
of corrective justice, then there is obviously no valid distinction to be drawn between physical and
psychiatric injury. On this view, the control mechanisms merely reflect a vulgar scepticism about the
reality of psychiatric injury or a belief that it is less worthy of compensation than physical injury: therein
the patient must minister to himself. On the other hand, if one starts from the imperfect reality of the
way the law of torts actually works, in which the vast majority of cases of injury and disability, both
physical and psychiatric, go uncompensated because the persons (if any) who caused the damage were
not negligent (a question which often involves very fine distinctions), or because the plaintiff lacks the
evidence or the resources to prove to a court that they were negligent, or because the potential
defendants happen to have no money, then questions of distributive justice tend to intrude themselves.
Why should X receive generous compensation for his injury when Y receives nothing? Is the
administration of so arbitrary and imperfect a system of compensation worth the very considerable cost?
On this view, a uniform refusal to provide compensation for psychiatric injury adds little to the existing
stock of anomaly in the law of torts and at least provides a rule which is easy to understand and cheap to
administer.
In McFarlane v Tayside Health Board23 the House of Lords held that damages
were not recoverable for the maintenance of a healthy child born following a
negligently performed vasectomy operation on her father. The child's mother was
allowed general damages for the pain, suffering and inconvenience of childbirth.
But the parents were refused their claim for the costs of maintaining and
educating their healthy "unplanned" child. Lord Steyn said:24
It is possible to view the case simply from the perspective of corrective justice. It requires somebody who
has harmed another without justification to indemnify the other. On this approach the parents' claim for
the cost of bringing up Catherine must succeed. But one may also approach the case from the vantage
point of distributive justice. It requires a focus on the just distribution of burdens and losses among
members of a society. If the matter is approached in this way, it may become relevant to ask of the
commuters on the Underground the following question: "Should the parents of an unwanted but healthy
child be able to sue the doctor or hospital for compensation equivalent to the cost of bringing up the
child for the years of his or her minority, ie until about 18 years?" My Lords, I have not consulted my
fellow travellers on the London Underground but I am firmly of the view that an overwhelming number
of ordinary men and women would answer the question with an emphatic "No". And the reason for such
a response would be an inarticulate premise as to what is morally acceptable and what is not. Like
Ognall J in Jones v Berkshire Area Health Authority, 2 July 1986, they will have in mind that many
couples cannot have children and others have the sorrow and burden of looking after a disabled child.
The realisation that compensation for financial loss in respect of the upbringing of a child would
necessarily have to discriminate between rich and poor would, surely appear unseemly to them. It would
also worry them that parents may be put in a position of arguing in court that the unwanted child, which
they accepted and care for, is more trouble than it is worth. Instinctively, the traveller on the
Underground would consider that the law of tort has no business to provide legal remedies consequent
upon the birth of a healthy child, which all of us regard as a valuable and good thing.
It is interesting that in Esanda Finance Corporation Ltd v Peat Marwick
Hungerfords25 McHugh J effectively recognised that distributive justice could
temper even "the most insistent demands of corrective justice". He saw the
extension of auditor's liability to cover cases like Esanda as:
... likely to mean that courts and judges hearing such cases will be tied up for many months – sometimes
for more than a year – to the detriment of other litigants. Only the most insistent demands of corrective
justice should induce the common law courts to mould legal rules to cover cases that bring about this
consequence in an era when court resources are already stretched to breaking point and courts are forced
to send many cases out to private arbitrators for determination.
It is too early to declare corrective justice as the victor in the field. But it
remains a predominating force.
Cutting across this corrective-distributive justice debate, but mainly within the
corrective justice framework, lies the question of the role of fault.
Occasionally judges acknowledge the impact of fault and the way that moral
responsibility is relevant in a marginal case.26 In Caltex Oil (Australia) Pty Ltd v
The Dredge "Willemstad",27 Stephen J referred to "a general public sentiment of
moral wrongdoing for which the offender must pay" as a broad principle
underlying liability in negligence.
Sir John Salmond denied the existence of a single law of tort. At the same time,
he argued that a condition usually demanded for liability in an action of tort was
either wrongful intention or culpable negligence on the part of the defendant. For
him, there was no reason why a loss should be shifted from one person's
shoulders to another's except, in general, to punish or deter wrongful intent or
negligence.28 Salmond was logically compelled to say of the decision in Rylands v
Fletcher,29 which is founded upon a theory of strict liability:30
No decision in the law of torts has done more to prevent the establishment of a simple, uniform, and
intelligible system of civil responsibility.
The High Court took note in Burnie Port Authority v General Jones Pty Ltd.31
McHugh J's protest that "the common law holds no prejudice against strict
liability"32 did not sway the majority.
The overruling of Beaudesert Shire Council v Smith33Northern Territory of
Australia v Mengel34 points in a similar direction. There have also been recent
stern reminders that the action for breach of statutory duty does not exist in the
absence of clearly expressed legislative intent to confer a personal right.35 Other
pockets of residual strict liability are being identified and exterminated in the
"staggering march of negligence".36
But the trend is not all one-way. The desire to find identifiable and deep-
pocketed defendants has pushed the boundaries of vicarious liability and non-
delegable duties of care. Indeed, there are strong hints by McHugh J and Kirby J
in Northern Sandblasting Ply Ltd v Harris37 that the time is ripe for the High
Court to consider adopting a principle of vicarious liability for the acts and
omissions of independent contractors. It is impossible to fit these developments
within the correlative framework of the corrective justice model.
"It's your fault, you should pay for it" represents the response of a primary
school child whose treasured toy is broken by a playmate. Childish insights to
ethical issues are not necessarily deficient. But complexities enter as the child
matures, especially if he or she stands in the wrongdoer's shoes.
The childish response occurs where causation in fact is clear, at least to the
child. There is a single wrongdoer whose responsibility stems directly from
smashing the toy. To the naive victim, the wrongdoer's capacity for self-discipline
does not enter into the equation, nor the unexpected extent of the loss, nor its
lack of proportion to the fault of the wrongdoer, nor the wrongdoer's capacity to
pay. These things only occur as the growing child starts to perceive that
standards set for others may be applied in reverse. Later comes the idea that it is
more useful to lay the problem at the feet of the wrongdoer's parents.
Similar developments affect the mature common law as it is asked to make
someone pay for every conceivable species of harm. Let me illustrate. P suffers
blood poisoning in hospital where he is a temporary patient following a minor
road accident. The simple example may throw up a plethora of issues:
Which individuals are liable: the doctor, the nurses, the driver?
Which organisations are liable because of vicarious liability or a non-
delegable duty: the hospital, the driver's employer, the car owner, the
highway authority?
What damages are payable by each defendant? Does every person liable
pay for both the bruising and the damage stemming from the blood
poisoning?
Are damages reduced for contributory negligence?
Can the defendants share the loss amongst themselves?
Several doctrines aid injured plaintiffs in their quest to find someone "to pay"
and pay in full. These include substantive rules like the "egg shell skull" rule.
There are also rules of procedure which aid plaintiffs uncertain whom to sue38 or
which allow (but do not compel) inferences of causation to be drawn against
persons whose negligence is followed by an accident of the kind within the scope
of the relevant duty.39 Indeed there is a current debate about whether persons
who create or increase a risk of injury should (without proof on the probabilities
that the risk came home) bear legal responsibility if the risk comes home.40 The
plaintiff's task is eased by the need to show only that the injuries were "caused or
materially contributed to" by the wrongful conduct of the chosen defendant or
defendants,41 and by the law's adherence to the concept of solidary liability.42
The fault notion may act as a control device. It is seen as unfair to place the
burden of loss upon the shoulders of a tortfeasor whose fault is disproportionate
to the loss claimed by one or many plaintiffs. To the extent that fault and degrees
of fault influence findings as to liability or the extent of liability, there is a
tempering of corrective justice in deference to a retribution principle in which
there is proportionality between the gravity of the defendant's conduct and the
extent of reparation.43
(Sometimes legislatures intervene to close floodgates. Occasionally defendants
are given statutory immunity, which the courts construe narrowly.44 More
common are legislative caps which preclude certain heads of damages or limit
their extent.)
Causation is a "central organising concept",45 usually a control device, in tort
law's quest to keep law (liability) and morality (fault) in step. Causation
reasoning is often used to expand or to stem liability for particular losses flowing
from an act of negligence.
Tracing tort law's use and abuse of causation discloses major developments in
the quest to recognise fault but to stem its disproportionate outcome. Many hard
issues have been hidden beneath the beguiling veneer of causation. In his
introduction to Responsibility and Fault, Professor Honoré states46 that "people
are never legally liable merely because they have caused someone harm".
It may be possible to see four stages in the use and abuse of causation.
Like the child whose toy is broken, the ancient common law usually treated
legal responsibility as a self-evident consequence of causation of damage,
regardless of fault. This is hardly surprising since concern was focused on
physical injury and since the action for trespass dealt with direct and intentional
acts. Even the action on the case refused until the nineteenth century to recognise
openly that absence of fault was an excuse.47 So mechanistic was the early
common law that it compensated for death by confiscation of the offending
animal or object or requiring the owner to pay its value. In this institution of
deodand, blame or fault was usually irrelevant, but juries sometimes imposed
nominal deodands if fault was absent.48
By the nineteenth century a tort of negligence had emerged, but Rylands v
Fletcher illustrates that strict liability remained well entrenched. Re Polemis and
Furness, Withy & Co Ltd49 epitomises the second stage of the role of causation in
tort damages. Liability now depends, in the main, upon proof of lack of due care
(fault) in established duty categories. But responsibility in damages (still almost
invariably for physical loss and damage) extends to all of the direct consequences
of a negligent act. On the plaintiff's side of the equation, contributory negligence
is a complete defence.
Ostensibly, causation reasoning provided answers for plaintiffs and defendants
in this era. To limit liability for negligent defendants and to permit recovery by
negligent plaintiffs judges developed metaphysical causation principles, using
them like circuit breakers. Concepts such as novus actus interveniens were
introduced as control devices to block Cardozo CJ's hideous spectre of liability "in
an indeterminate amount for an indeterminate time to an indeterminate class".50
In many cases, the judges were driven "to take refuge in metaphor or Latin".51
Refinements such as causa causans, effective cause, proximate or legal cause and
novus actus interveniens were introduced to reflect degrees of fault and to deal
with difficulties presented by the distinction between acts and omissions and
where the acts of third persons or natural forces are concerned. Negligent
plaintiffs sometimes succeeded by showing that the defendant had the "last
opportunity" to avoid an accident, and until at least the 1950s "last opportunity"
was viewed in terms of breaking a chain of causation stemming from the
plaintiff's own negligence.52
Wagon Mound (No 1) gave greater emphasis to the fault concept by overruling
Re Polemis and offering foreseeability of damage as a control device.53 However,
Viscount Simond's test was really "a flexible concept deprive[d] ... of any
fettering rigidity".54 It warned not to take causation too far, but it did not change
much. Re Polemis would probably be decided the same today. Wagon Mound has
spawned its own complex distinctions between foreseeability as to kinds of
damage and foreseeability as to the manner in which damage might occur.55
Around the 1960s and 1970s there was a determined effort by appellate judges
to expel metaphysical theory with its attendant metaphors and latinisms.
Windeyer J once joked that:
those who would explain common law principles by exotic Latin maxims ought surely to remember that
these are to be understood secundum subjectam materiam.56
What were we offered in its place? Enter the third phase. "Causation" was still
seen as central, because reasonable foreseeability only "mark[ed] the limits
beyond which a wrongdoer will not be held responsible for damage resulting
from his wrongful act".57 However, we were assured that causation problems
could be solved by the robust application of "common sense". Thus, in Alphacell
Ltd v Woodward58 Lord Salmon said that:
... what or who has caused a certain event to occur is essentially a practical question of fact which can
best be answered by ordinary common sense rather than by abstract metaphysical theory.
This robust approach was particularly suitable in the era when juries decided
liability and damages.59
March v E & MH Stramare Pty Ltd60 is the Australian authority still often cited
for the glib submission that causation is a question of fact and a matter of
common sense. It is frequently invoked in a context suggesting that hard
questions of responsibility for fault can be solved once the causation issue is
properly addressed. In fact, March is the modem turning point and the start of a
fourth era in which causation reasoning becomes increasingly unfashionable. The
CLR headnote reiterates the mantra that causation is essentially a question of fact
to be answered by reference to common sense and experience. But this
misrepresents March, which substantially qualifies or undermines this
proposition by going on to emphasise that questions of policy and value
judgments necessarily affect legal responsibility, measure of damages,
contributory negligence and apportionment. The judgments in March
acknowledge that the attribution of responsibility is a value-laden exercise even if
the language of causation is used. Mason CJ was even critical of the view that
value judgment has no part to play even in resolving causation as an issue of
fact.61
Building on March, there has been a further retreat in the last decade from the
misplaced and misleading confidence that causation can be reduced to an opaque
jury instruction about using common sense. Lord Hoffmann's speech in
Environment Agency v Empress Car Co (Abertillery) Ltd62 is a milestone. His
Lordship put the matter bluntly in a recent paper:63
The reason why courts get the wrong answer on questions of causation is not usually because they have
misunderstood the facts or lack common sense but because they have got the law wrong.
We are now urged to ask necessary causation questions in their particular
factual and legal context and, in the case of tort, from the point of view of the
injured plaintiff and the wrong sued upon. Professor Stapleton helpfully describes
this as the perspective through which the objective phenomenon of causation is
judged.64 Thus, in Chappel, Gaudron J said:65
Questions of causation are not answered in a legal vacuum. Rather, they are answered in the legal
framework in which they arise. For present purposes, that framework is the law of negligence. And in
that framework, it is important to bear in mind that that body of law operates, if it operates at all, to
assign a duty to take reasonable steps to prevent a foreseeable risk of harm of the kind in issue.
Cases such as Medlin v State Government Insurance Commission66 applied this
approach to mitigation issues. The last of the metaphysical latinisms using the
language of causation (novus actus interveniens) was shown the door, without
actually being booted out. The High Court there emphasised that the
reasonableness of the plaintiff's conduct was to be judged, as between the
plaintiff and the defendant, and from the perspective of the plaintiff's injured
condition.
Appeals to common sense should nevertheless serve to remind us that the
exercise is one in which judges and juries should have confidence in their
personal sense of wisdom and reasonableness. But the task remains normative,
because in the final analysis the various tests "allow the tribunal of fact to
determine legal liability on broad grounds of moral responsibility for the damage
which has occurred".67
In March, the High Court exposed the presence of policy values sheltering
behind the glib language of causation. In later cases, that Court has commenced
to articulate those values. The guidance from the recent cases is that ultimate
questions such as "was there breach?", "did it affect the plaintiff's conduct?" and
"did it cause the damage claimed?" must be asked in the context of the
defendant's legal responsibility to the particular plaintiff. This may involve
considering the scope of the risk in contemplation of the legal duty.
A cynical response to the title of my paper would be to propound the thesis
that if a judge is moved by fault then he or she will find legal responsibility. But
the books are full of cases "which show how shadowy is the line between
culpability and compensation".68 Recent decisions and recent academic writing
have cast much light on the subject. The shadows remain, but the focus is clearer.
* President of the New South Wales Court of Appeal.
1 Robert M Pirsig, Zen and the Art of Motor Cycle Maintenance: An Inquiry into Values, W Morrow,
New York, 1983, p162.
2 [1999] HCA 36, 73 ALJR 1190, 164 ALR 606.
3 Support for this factor has firmed in Crimmins v Stevedoring Industry Finance Committee (1999) 167
ALR 1 at [3] per Gleeson CJ (agreeing with McHugh J), [43] per Gaudron J, [100], [104] per McHugh
J, [233] per Kirby J.
4 South Pacific Manufacturing Co Ltd v New Zealand Security Consultants & Investigations Ltd [1992] 2
NZLR 282 at 294. See also J Stapleton, "Duty of Care Factors: A Selection from the Judicial Menus" in
P Cane and J Stapleton (eds), The Law of Obligations: Essays in Celebration of John Fleming,
Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1998.
5 Letter dated 1 June 1937 quoted by Bennett, Keystone of the Federal Arch, p 67.
6 This, of course, happened. The new age of certainty dawned in Hughes & Vale Pty Ltd v New South
Wales [1955] AC 241. It was to flourish for a time, before a new dark age, followed by a new age of
certainty was to reappear (Cole v Whitfield (1988) 165 CLR 360) briefly (cf Bath v Alston Holdings Pty
Ltd (1988) 165 CLR 411).
7 [1999] HCA 59 at [73]-[78].
8 Kirby J spoke to same effect at [226] n262.
9 See T Honoré, Responsibility and Fault, Hart Publishing, Oxford, 1999, pp125-9. This book republishes
essays written during the last decade, with an introduction drawing together the various strands.
10 A number of ostensibly procedural rules assist plaintiffs in their quest to prove a tort case against
chosen defendants (see nn41, 42 below).
11 Wilson v Peisley (1975) 7 ALR 571, 50 ALJR 207.
12 Perre at [103], [151]. See also Esanda Finance Corporation Ltd v Peat Marwick Hungerfords (1997) 188
CLR 241 at 284, 289.
13 Perre at [131]. See also Gummow J at [171].
14 See, eg EJ Weinrib, "The Special Morality of Tort Law" (1989) 34 McGill Law Rev 403; RW Wright,
"Substantive Corrective Justice" (1992) 77 Iowa Law Rev 625; Honoré, op cit, n9, pp73-6.
15 See J Stapleton, "Duty of Care: Peripheral Parties and Alternative Opportunities for Deterrence" (1995)
111 LQR 301; Crimmins at [306] (Hayne J).
16 See generally P Cane, "Corrective Justice and Correlativity in Private Law" (1996) 16 Ox Jo LS 471;
Honoré, op cit, n9, pp80-7.
17 At present the availability of insurance is, in theory, an irrelevant factor; see Kars v Kars (1996) 187
CLR 354 at 378-9; Esanda at 302-3.
18 See J Stapleton, "In Restraint of Tort" in P Birks (ed), The Frontiers of Liability, Oxford University Press,
Oxford, New York, 1994, vol 2, p95.
19 [1999] 2 AC 455.
20 Whether this represents the Australian law is unclear. Cf Mount Isa Mines Ltd v Pusey (1970) 125 CLR
383.
21 Alcock v Chief Constable of South Yorkshire Police [1992] 1 AC 310.
22 At 503.
23 [1999] 3 WLR 1301.
24 At 1318.
25 (1997) 188 CLR 241 at 284.
26 See, eg McLoughlin v O'Brian [1983] AC 410 at 441 (Lord Bridge).
27 (1976) 136 CLR 529 at 575. The passage is cited by Gummow J in Perre at [171]. Stephen J was quoting
from Lord Atkin's speech in Donoghue v Stevenson [1932] AC 562 at 580.
28 Sir John William Salmond, The law of torts: a treatise on the English law of liability for civil injuries,
6th edn. Sweet & Maxwell, London, 1924, pp12-13. See discussion by RFV Heuston & RA Buckley in
Salmond and Heuston on the Law of Torts, 21st edn, Sweet & Maxwell, London, 1996, pp21-5.
29 (1866) LR 1 Ex 265, (1868) LR 3 HL 330.
30 Salmond on Torts, 6th edn, op cit, n28, at viii.
31 (1994) 179 CLR 520.
32 At 593. Only Brennan J joined him in dissent.
33 (1966) 120 CLR 145.
34 (1995) 185 CLR 307.
35 Ibid, at 343-4; Byrne v Australian Airlines Ltd (1995) 185 CLR 410 at 458-9; Crimmins at [157]-[158]
(Gummow J).
36 See T Weir, "The staggering march of negligence" in Cane and Stapleton, op cit, n4. Professor Weir
instances developments in relation to nuisance, trespass, defamation and other areas where there are
intrusions of negligence's concepts of reasonableness, foreseeability, proximity, remoteness etc.
37 (1997) 188 CLR 313 at 366, 392. For recent cases illustrating difficulties with the existing law, see
Newcastle Entertainment Security Pty Ltd v Simpson [1999] NSWCA 351, Mollis v Vabu Pty Ltd (T/as
Crisis Couriers) [1999] NSWCA 334.
38 See Bendix Mintex Pty Ltd v Barnes (1997) 42 NSWLR 307 at 317.
39 See Belts v Whittingslowe (1945) 71 CLR 637 at 649; Chappel v Hart (1998) 195 CLR 232 at 238-9, 247-8,
257, 273-4; Naxakis v Western General Hospital [1999] HCA 22 at [31], [76], [127],
40 The debate centres on the interpretation or re-interpretation of Lord Wilberforce's speech in McGhee v
National Coal Board [1973] 1 WLR 1 at 6-7. Some propose effective reversal of onus of proof as
distinct from the reasoning process referred to the authorities cited in the previous footnote. Cf
Bennett v Minister for Community Welfare (1992) 176 CLR 408 at 420-1, esp fn (23) (Gaudron J);
Chappel at 273-4 (Kirby J); J Stapleton, "The Gist of Negligence" (1988) 104 LQR 389 at 401-7. Within
New South Wales much of the debate is focused on the correctness or otherwise of my reasons in
Bendix Mintex in their application to mesothelioma cases.
41 March v E & MH Stramare Pty Ltd (1991) 171 CLR 506 at 514.
42 This enables the plaintiff to take action against one of many defendants and to receive full
compensation from that defendant, leaving it to the defendant to seek to recover a share of the
damages from any other liable defendant. See generally New South Wales Law Reform Commission,
Contribution Between Persons Liable for the Same Damages, 1999, R99.
43 See Honoré, op cit, n9, pp85-7.
44 See, eg Puntoriero v Water Administration Ministerial Corporation (1999) 165 ALR 337, (1999) 73 ALJR
1359.
45 Weinrib, op cit, n14, p404.
46 Ibid, at p7.
47 Alford v Magee (1952) 85 CLR 437 at 453. Generally, see C Peck, "Negligence and Liability Without
Fault in Tort Law" (1971) 46 Washington L Rev 225 at 225-7.
48 See T Sutton, "The Deodand and Responsibility for Death" (1997) 18 Legal History 44.
49 [1921] 3 KB 560.
50 Ultramares Corp v Touche 174 NE 441 at 444 (1931).
51 Environment Agency v Empress Car Co (Abertillery) Limited [1999] 2 AC 22 at 29 per Lord Hoffmann.
52 In Alford v Magee (1952) 85 CLR 437 the High Court exploded this view. But the proposition that the
last opportunity rule was not a test of causation had to be reiterated in Chapman v Hearse (1961) 106
CLR 112 at 123-4. See also March at 511-4.
53 Overseas Tankership (UK) Ltd v Mort's Dock & Engineering Co Ltd ("The Wagon Mound") [1961] AC
388.
54 Sir Robin Cooke, "Remoteness of Damages and Judicial Discretion" [1978] Cam LJ 501 at 537. In March
(at 510), Mason CJ explained that reasonable foresight was later to be rejected as a test of causation
(in Chapman v Hearse) and as an exclusive criteria of responsibility (in McKew v Holland & Hannen
& Cubitts [1970] SC (HL) 20 and Mahoney v J Kruschich (Demolitions) Pty Ltd (1985) 156 CLR 522).
55 Chapman at 120-1; Hughes v Lord Advocate [1963] AC 837; Commonwealth v McLean (1996) 41 NSWLR
389 at 402-7.
56 Smith v Jenkins (1970) 119 CLR 397 at 410.
57 Chapman at 122 per curiam.
58 [1972] AC 824 at 847. Lord Hoffmann describes this as being "in the best tradition of English anti-
intellectualism" Common Sense and Causing Loss, lecture to the Chancery Bar Association, 15 June
1999, p2. See also Clay v A J Crump & Sons Ltd [1964] 1 QB 533 at 568-9 per Upjohn LJ ("... causation
is almost entirely a question of fact in each case").
59 See Fitzgerald v Penn (1954) 91 CLR 268.
60 (1991) 171 CLR 506.
61 At 515-7. See also Deane J at 523-4.
62 [1999] 2 AC 22.
63 See footnote 58.
64 J Stapleton, "Perspectives on Causation" in Oxford Essays in Jurisprudence, 4th series, Oxford
University Press, Oxford 1999.
65 (1998) 195 CLR 232 at 238.
66 (1995) 182 CLR 1. In so doing, the court effectively applied what Mason CJ and McHugh J had said
about novus actus interveniens in March. See Kavanagh v Akhtar (1998) 45 NSWLR at 597-9.
67 March at 531 per McHugh J.
68 Wagon Mound (No 1) at 418 per Viscount Simonds.