11 Death Causation in Palliative
Medicine
MICHAEL ASHBY*
Introduction
Analysis of causation is central to any deliberative process which has as its object
the determination of the moral character and legality of medical decisions or
palliative interventions at the end of life, but there are semantic, evidential and
argumentation difficulties which require elucidation.1 The following quotation,
from a 1996 judgment in the United States articulates (at its most extreme) the
prevalent established international medico-legal view of palliative care
interventions and death causation:
as part of the tradition of administering comfort care, doctors have been supplying the causal agent of
patients' deaths for decades.2
Whilst it is undoubtedly true that throughout history certain doctors have
administered treatment to terminally ill patients with the covert or overt
intention of shortening their lives, this is not the clinical or ethical position which
is put forward by palliative care practitioners.3 It is the central tenet of this
chapter that death causation is a major factor influencing care and decision-
making at end of life. There has been a failure within medicine itself to deal with
causation in this context, and there are widespread anxieties about responsibility
for causing death. As well, questionable assumptions by health care professionals
and the public, concerning law and ethics, permeate practice and debate related
to death and dying.
These problems are apparent in an influential study published by Kuhse et al
in 1997.4 They conducted a survey of a cross sectional sample of the Australian
medical work force to study attitudes to end of life care and decision-making.
Their work was based on the approach taken by Van der Maas and co-workers,5
where a legal channel for such practices exists. In these studies euthanasia is
categorised as a type of medical decision at the end of life (MDEL).6 The term
medical decision at the end of life, used by both groups of researchers,
encompasses:
all decisions by physicians concerning courses of action aimed at hastening the end of life of the patient
or courses of action for which the physician takes into account the probability that the end of life of the
patient is hastened.7
Two of the other categories (in addition to euthanasia) are: firstly,
administration of "high doses of opioids" that "almost certainly would shorten the
life of the patient" and secondly, decisions in which "lifeprolonging" treatment
was withheld or withdrawn.8
The Australian authors reported that some kind of end of life decision was
made in 64.8 per cent of cases. The largest sub-group was "alleviation of pain and
suffering through the administration of opioids in sufficient doses to hasten
death" – 30.9 per cent (with a stated intention to hasten death in 6.5 per cent),
followed by "decision not to treat" – 28.6 per cent (with an explicit intention to
hasten death stated in 24.7 per cent).9 This study was based on doctors'
perceptions and interpretations of their management and decision-making for the
most recent patient who died under their care in the year prior to the completion
of the study questionnaire. There was no attempt to validate these impressions,
and the results should be viewed with caution. However, at the very least, they
show that these general practitioners and non-palliative care specialists
considered themselves to be making significant contributions to the cause of
death of their dying patients, far in excess of what most palliative care specialists
would expect.10
In a 1995 survey of specialist Victorian nurses, some respondents expressed the
following views about causation in their practice:
Surprisingly, even within the palliative care and cancer nursing communities, myths exist about the
power of morphine to lead to respiratory distress and death in narcotic-tolerant patients. Of further
concern is that some respondents consider the routine escalation of morphine doses in response to
increasing pain, as active euthanasia. The knowledge and attitudes of nurses about euthanasia, and the
use of morphine in particular, requires further exploration.11
So, within medicine and nursing themselves, there is no clear agreement on
death causation with regard to palliative care interventions and treatment
abatement decisions. The majority of palliative care practitioners, and all of their
peak bodies, maintain the position that in clinical practice, provided that the
prevailing standards of the field are adhered to, the process of dying is neither
hastened nor prolonged. Death is therefore natural12 in a forensic sense, that is it
results from natural causes, ie there is no human agency involved. However, there
is a growing view, particularly in the health professions, that there are now very
few natural deaths because they are mostly orchestrated13 by medical decisions.
At the very least timing and mode of death, if not the main mechanism (disease
or injury), are now determined, wholly or in part, by human intervention.
Palliative care literature and practice is infused with a notion of the
"naturalness" of death in an existential sense, that is death is an inevitable
consequence of living, and dying is emphasised as being a normal part of the life
cycle. Palliative care practice is therefore based on the recognition of a natural
dying process.
Opioid and Sedative Drugs in Palliative Care
Significant obstacles to the good care of dying people can be shown to arise from
deeply entrenched myths that morphine causes addiction and death.14 In
countries like the United Kingdom and Australia, which have made substantial
inroads into palliative care provision, access to opioids is good, but some
bureaucratic hurdles still exist which generate inconvenience for prescribers. In
many other countries, however, access to morphine is still limited or non-
existent, and there is still serious concern that in global terms poor cancer pain
control is commonly due, at least in part, to poor opioid access.15 This is largely
due to the regulation of opioid use by governments in order to control illicit drug
use and its enormous attendant social and health problems.
In two surveys conducted in 1991 for a parliamentary select committee of the
South Australian parliament, general practitioners showed minimal concern
about addiction to pain-killing drugs, but over 80 per cent of the community
sample thought that addiction was a significant issue. A causal question
concerning pain relief was asked in the public survey and showed a wide
divergence of views, and much uncertainty.16 Unfortunately, no such question
was asked in the general practitioner study.17
In a large retrospective case note review of 11,882 hospitalised inpatients at
Boston University Medical Center, two physicians reported that only four
patients showed evidence of addiction to opioids prescribed for pain.18 Marie
Fallon (Glasgow, Scotland) and colleagues conducted a prospective comparative
study of mood and drug use in three groups of patients receiving opioids for:
cancer pain, chronic non-malignant pain and drug dependence. They found
profound differences in opioid use between the groups. Whilst cancer and chronic
pain patients mainly took opioids to relieve pain, those with drug dependence
used them for mood elevation and sleep.19 Although medical opinion is now clear
that addiction is not an issue in cancer pain management and palliative care,
opinion is divided about opioid use in non-malignant pain,20 and patients and
families in the wider community clearly still have a high level of concern about
the potential for addiction.
Despite an extensive and sustained international campaign by the World
Health Organisation,21 many doctors still believe that they are causing or
hastening the death of their palliative care patients, despite a lack of any evidence
to support this view.22 These deep-seated fears are based on the fact that opioids,
used inappropriately, can cause respiratory depression, coma and death. In
particular, the notion that there is agreement about a "high" dose of an opioid
drug such as morphine beyond which timing and possibly causation might be in
question has permeated medicine, and hence, every legal deliberation on this
issue since the 1957 instruction to the jury by Devlin J in R v Adams:
But that does not mean that a doctor who is aiding the sick and the dying has to calculate in minutes or
even hours, and perhaps not in days or weeks, the effect on the patient's life of the medicines that he
administers or else be in peril of a charge of murder. If the first purpose of medicine, the restoration of
health, can no longer be achieved, there is still much for a doctor to do and he is entitled to do all that is
proper and necessary to relieve pain and suffering, even if the measures he takes may incidentally
shorten life. This is not because there is a special defence for medical men but because no act is murder
which does not cause death. We are not dealing here with the philosophical or technical cause, but with
the commonsense cause. The cause of death is the illness or injury, and the proper medical treatment that
is administered and that has an incidental effect on determining the exact moment of death is not the
cause of death in any sensible use of the term. But ... no doctor, nor any man, no more in the case of the
dying than of the healthy, has the right deliberately to cut the thread of life.23
It is clear that expert medical evidence, given forty years ago has been
incorporated into legal deliberations and public policy formulation ever since.
Whilst the judgment is supportive of palliative care, and expresses double effect
in law for the first time in this context, much has changed in medicine (and
society) since the expert evidence which would have informed that judgment in
1957. The title for Patrick Devlin's 1985 book as a result of the 1957 Bodkin
Adams case, Easing the Passing,24 is perhaps illustrative of the prevailing views
on palliative care at the time. The widespread use of the Brompton's Cocktail25
also shows that the view of dying was that rapidity of death and oblivion were
the goals of palliative interventions, which were almost exclusively focused on
terminal care. Palliative care has now expanded well beyond terminal care, and is
seeing patients far earlier in the course of their illness. Patient expectations have
also changed, and until the last few hours or days of life, most patients wish to
have optimal pain management with minimal side effects; in particular, they do
not wish to be drowsy or cognitively impaired. Ognall J in his summing up to the
jury in R v Cox, shows that, in 1992, this perception of the fine line for medical
practitioners between provision of pain relief and causing death was still
operating:
We all appreciate that some medical treatment, whether of a positive, therapeutic character or solely of
an analgesic kind – by which I mean designed solely to alleviate pain and suffering – some treatment
carries with it a serious risk to the health or even the life of the patient. Doctors are frequently
confronted with, no doubt, distressing dilemmas. They have to make up their minds as to whether the
risk, even to the life of their patient, attendant upon their contemplated form of treatment, is such that
the risk is, or is not, medically justified. If a doctor genuinely believes that a certain course is beneficial
to his patient, either therapeutically or analgesically, then even though he recognises that that course
carries with it a risk to life, he is fully entitled, nonetheless, to pursue it. If in those circumstances the
patient dies, nobody could possibly suggest that in that situation the doctor was guilty of murder or
attempted murder.26
There is no clinical scientific evidence that morphine causes death, if used with
appropriate skill to palliate symptoms. However, like any class of drugs, the
opioids are dangerous if used inappropriately. There is now a substantial body of
clinical experience in palliative care about safe standards of practice, with
particular regard to initial doses for "opioidnaïve" patients and subsequent dose
titration according to the person's pain or symptom reporting. It is widely
assumed that the morphine (or other opioid) dose per se, is the main determinant
of whether the drug causes or hastens death. In fact there is no such
determinative or threshold dose, and this approach is flawed. What matters is the
present dose in relation to the previous dose. Gradual dose escalation by a factor
in the region of 50-100 per cent of the previous dose is usual practice, although
substantially higher increases can usually be well tolerated by patients who are
not new to the drug (that is they are no longer termed "opioid-naive"). It is
therefore the size of the initial dose, and the rate of subsequent increases which
are important.
Cancer pain management with morphine is unusual compared to most other
forms of drug treatment in that there are no predetermined dose ranges to
achieve satisfactory pain control for adults or children. Most adults will achieve
initial pain control with a daily dose in the range of 30 mg to 200 mg (per 24
hours, orally), but the range of doses is very wide. The accepted practice is to
adjust the regular dose upwards according to the requirements to keep the pain
under control, balanced against incidence of side effects.
Terminal Sedation
Sedative drugs are commonly used in terminal care (when death is believed to be
imminent), in order to maintain comfort and dignity (for patient and family) by
alleviation of agitation, anxiety and so-called terminal restlessness. They are used
proportionately to the patient's distress, and not to bring about death. It should
incidentally be noted that patients are usually unconscious and/or cognitively
impaired, and therefore incompetent at this stage. They are used proportionately
to the patient's distress, and not to bring about death. It is clear that there is a
robust disagreement within medicine itself, about whether such treatment
contributes to the cause of death, and even what the therapeutic goals are or
should be. There are those who contend that, within accepted palliative care
practice, patients are sedated, and death is thereby caused, either through central
nervous system and respiratory depression, or dehydration and starvation.27
Billings and Block also contend that this is the result of the use of morphine
infusions.28 Certainly, palliative care practitioners rarely use morphine for its
sedative properties at any stage of an illness, especially when patients are trying
to function as normally as possible, and sedation is usually unwelcome. In
terminal care sedatives are titrated against agitation and distress, but occasionally
also against another symptom (eg pain or shortness of breath) where other
measures have failed and the patient may wish to be less aware of what they are
going through. If patients are conscious and competent they are consulted about
this and asked if they wish to be more sedated. However, patients in the terminal
phase of their illness are often unable to give this consent due to incompetence as
a result of unconsciousness and/or cognitive impairment. It is clearly not possible
to state categorically that such sedation has no effect on time of death. The
precise timing of death is unpredictable, and verification of the relative causal
contributions to that timing of disease, physiological and pharmacological factors
is not usually measurable. Outside the setting of terminal care, so-called
"pharmacological oblivion" is not part of accepted palliative care practice,
especially not as a way of ending a patient's life.
Causation
Dialogue between medicine and the law is hampered by the fact that the term
"causation" in medicine and science is usually employed in a narrow empirical
sense, a term which itself has a complex and interesting history,29 but taken here
to mean the facts or data pertaining to a given situation, and their relationship to
one another. Causation is a complex phenomenon in the law, and it might be
reasonably argued that it is a misnomer in that context.30 Legal causation is a
process whereby courts look at the chain of events in a case, and then attempt to
attribute legal liability. In legal usage the term therefore encompasses the facts
and determination of legal liability.31
Most people without a legal background, and hence most health care
practitioners, will have a narrow medical view of causation, which approximates
to the but-for test of causation.32 In fact the law, particularly in Australia, tends to
recognise the multifactorial nature of causation, and does not use the "but-for"
test as the sole legal standard for ascertaining or apportioning legal responsibility,
which is over-arched or controlled by the test of common sense and experience:
In law ... problems of causation arise in the context of ascertaining or apportioning legal responsibility
for a given occurrence ... Thus, at law a person may be responsible for damage when his or her wrongful
conduct is one of a number of conditions sufficient to produce that damage.33
With regard to palliative care, it can also be shown that in (at least)
jurisdictions which follow the English common law tradition (eg, Australia, New
Zealand, Canada, the United States, and of course, England and Wales), the
leading reference case is still R v Adams, and, in particular, the famous passage
on causation quoted above.
Although there has been no known case where this position has been put to
the test as such, it is always quoted in judicial and parliamentary deliberations
concerning end of life issues. Absent any prosecutions of medical practitioners,
except where intention is clearly in question,34 academic lawyers and
parliamentary inquiries have continued to take the view that prosecution is at
least theoretically possible, and various legal mechanisms have been put forward
to allow lawful palliative care.35
The Australian Attorney General's Department gave this (confusing) legal
advice to the senate inquiry about the meaning of the term "intentional killing" in
the Euthanasia Laws Bill, and whether the passage of the bill would generate
legal "uncertainty" about end of life decisions:
The Attorney-General's Department noted that English cases refer to a rule that a doctor caring for a
dying patient may lawfully administer painkilling drugs despite the fact that he or she knows that an
incidental effect of doing so will be to shorten the patient's life. The Department said it is uncertain
whether the rule as stated is part of the law in all common law jurisdictions in Australia ... [and a]
degree of further uncertainty exists as to code jurisdictions .... The Department said if the rule were to be
adopted [in Australia], "which seems probable as to general principle, if uncertain as to reasoning and
detail", many uncertainties remain on matters of significant detail.36
In a 1989 paper on criminal law reform, by the Law Reform Commission of
Canada, it was proposed that criminal liability not attach to the administration of
life-shortening palliative care "appropriate to the circumstances". In a
commentary on this, David Casswell (an academic lawyer in British Columbia at
the time) urged more specific criteria (terminal illness, pain and suffering). In his
paper he agreed with Devlin J's instruction to the jury on causation in R v Adams,
but stated that he:
did not support as a generalized proposition his Lordship's reasoning that palliative care which has the
"incidental effect of determining the exact moment of death, or may have, is not the cause of death in
any sensible use of the term". If a factual causal connection between the administration of palliative care
and the patient's death is proved and if the physician subjectively knew that the palliative care he or she
was about to administer would likely be life-shortening, it would seem that causation would be
established. Further, two causes may operate together, with each legally being a cause of an event. In the
present context both the patient's illness and the physician's administration of life-shortening palliative
care would be the causes of death.37
Casswell argued that Devlin J's "absence of causal analysis" in the case had led
to reasoning by others that there was an absence of intent, or that the act was
justified by necessity (to relieve pain).
Peter Skegg (Professor of Law, Otago University, New Zealand) has written
that there is a theoretical possibility that the administration of painkilling drugs
which hasten death might lead to a prosecution of negligent homicide38 in a New
Zealand court, although no such thing has so far happened, and criminal liability
would not be established, provided that intention is clear. Reliance on causation is
thought to be preferable to a defence of necessity, as these do not have a very
successful track record in English courts.39
It is of note that Skegg has contended that the principle of double effect has no
standing in legal analysis. It has recently been subjected to penetrating
intellectual assault by a number of writers, despite the fact that courts and
parliaments have endorsed it.40 Singer has suggested that it is a "figleaf" behind
which decisions at the end of life, which will have the effect of ending life, are
hidden. In the Bland case, he makes the surely strong and self-evident case that
the intended outcome of the court's decision was Anthony Bland's death.41 Jessica
Corner, a prominent palliative care nurse, in commenting on the recent Annie
Lindsell case in the United Kingdom, has made a plea for palliative care to
recognise that there may be times when death is an intended outcome.42 Quill
and coauthors have argued that patient self determination is more important than
doctors' intentions as a guide to action in end of life decision making.43 This view
has been shared by a South Australian palliative care specialist (Roger Hunt),44
and another in Quebec (Marcel Boisvert).45
Keyserlingk,46 in an argument against decriminalisation of assisted suicide
based on an analysis of Rodriguez, proposes a move away from standard and
"but-for" causality of death approaches in legal analysis, and the adoption of
what he terms a normative causality approach, and what courts more commonly
term the common sense and experience test of causation. He divides causality
into three categories: standard, empirical and normative.
Standard causality entails the characterisation of treatments (eg ordinary v
extraordinary) in order to allow abatement. Cause of death is usually ascribed to
the underling disease rather than the decision or intervention in question. Any
therapeutic intervention in palliative or terminal care may potentially affect the
timing of death, but the cause remains the underlying condition from which the
person is dying. Lord Goff appears to be articulating Keyserlingk's standard
causality category in Bland:47
As I see it, the doctor's decision whether or not to take any step must (subject to his patient's ability to
give or withhold his consent) be made in the best interests of the patient. It is this principle too which, in
my opinion, underlies the established rule that a doctor may, when caring for a patient who is, for
example, dying of cancer, lawfully administer painkilling drugs despite the fact that he knows that an
incidental effect of that application will be to abbreviate the patient's life. Such a decision may properly
be made as part of the care of the living patient, in his best interests; and, on this basis, the treatment will
be lawful. Moreover, where the doctor's treatment of his patient is lawful, the patient's death will be
regarded in law as exclusively caused by the injury or disease to which his condition is attributable.
"But-for" or empirical causality relies on the scientific cause. Normative
causality allows a more comprehensive analysis including normative
considerations and empirical data:
(This) position emphasises not simple scientific causality, the cause-in-fact of a death, but normative or
legal causality as well. This more nuanced and comprehensive analysis holds that empirical, scientific or
"but-for" causality cannot alone account for what distinguishes assisted suicide from voluntary
euthanasia, or what distinguishes both from withdrawal of life support or appropriate pain control
resulting in death.48
This normative, or "common sense and experience" approach allows the "but-
for" cause of death to be overridden if a society (via its legal or parliamentary
institutions) decides that the intervention or non-intervention in question should
not be viewed as a cause of death in law. Jane Stapleton has suggested that
causation in legal analysis sometimes masks more important public policy
considerations which may be the true issues at stake in certain cases.49
Margaret Somerville has given the most profound analysis of the difficulties
which are encountered when those outside the law attempt to grapple with legal
causation and its application to end of life issues.50 She points out the important
but nuanced distinctions between causation in criminal, and tort (civil
responsibility) law. In criminal law, for causal analysis to be relevant, there would
need to be conduct which would constitute a crime, actus rea, together with the
mens rea, criminal intent, and the "but-for" test is not always applied. She writes:
When multiple causes are present, there is a value judgement involved in choosing which formulation of
the "but-for" test predominates in establishing causation-in-fact, and whether none of the causal factors,
one, more than one, or all of them, each of which could attract legal liability, count as relevant in
establishing criminal liability.51
Somerville points out the distinction between cause-in-fact and cause-in-law
(causa causans) and its lesser emphasis in criminal compared to tort law. She
cites this example:
In a situation where one has a duty not to continue to treat the patient with artificial life support because
the patient has refused this or because it is medically futile, then it is inappropriate to formulate the test
of causation (even if it were relevant to assess causation, itself, which it is not if the act of withdrawing
treatment is legal) in terms of whether the cause of death was the withdrawal of the treatment. The
physician cannot have a legal obligation to withdraw the treatment and not withdraw it and we must
choose which of these duties predominates in a given situation. If the former, then the relevant test of
cause of the patient's death is "but for" the patient's underlying condition would the patient have died; if
the latter, "but for" turning off the respirator would the patient have died.52
Looking at withdrawal of life support, another approach is to see it as a
situation of multiple causation, but here Somerville notes that courts, from the
point of view of causation, where the act is legal, say turning off a respirator (for
example) was not the cause of death, death resulted from "natural causes". Judges
adopt this line of reasoning, she speculates:
to avoid any possibility that they could be seen as setting a precedent to the effect that lethal injections
would be legally acceptable.53
In the law of torts, tests for causation-in-law are of "varying degrees of
stringency", and are of two sorts, "reasonable foreseeability" (a prospective test)
and "substantive cause" (a retrospective test). So with a treatment withdrawal
decision, death may be foreseeable, but not the "substantive" cause of death. In
tort cases, Somerville also points out that judges will sometimes attempt to
determine the proximity or remoteness of the damage from the cause, another
way of looking at foreseeability.
The last test analysed by Somerville is that of public policy, which can be
mobilised in tort law to provide immunity from legal liability, but not to impose
it, and also has a special role in the criminal law to:
characterise acts to which consent of the person affected by such acts may function as a defence. For
instance, the intentional infliction of bodily harm, beyond a certain very limited degree, will be held to
be contrary to public policy and, therefore at common law the consent of the person suffering that harm
will not be a defence to such an act.54
Lastly, Somerville addresses the public policy stance on the importance of the
provision of pain and symptom relief, albeit with the causal assumption about
pain relief and death risk:
This raises the issue of how necessary pain relief treatment given with the primary intention of relieving
pain that could or will shorten life should be prima facie characterised from a public policy perspective.
Just as the intent to relieve pain and not to kill justifies, through the doctrine of double effect, the
administration of such treatment, likewise this same intent legitimates this treatment from a public
policy perspective and, therefore, it can be given with the consent of the patient. Indeed, it should be
considered contrary to public policy to fail to offer fully adequate pain relief treatment to persons who
need this.55
A novel approach to these issues, in law, comes from South Australia. Double
effect was put into statute law for the first time, with regard to the care of dying
persons, with the Consent to Medical Treatment and Palliative Care Act 1995
(SA). In Division 2 of the Act, entitled "The Care of People Who Are Dying",
there is a non-culpability clause which specifically states that medical treatment
for the relief of pain or distress, and the non-application or discontinuance of life
sustaining measures (for people who are dying) does not constitute "an
intervening cause of death" (novus actus interveniens, ie a cause that breaks a
pre-existing chain of causation). A saving provision was inserted stating that the
provision does not allow euthanasia.56
The parliamentary select committee from which this piece of legislation
emerged heard wide-ranging evidence, including assertions by palliative care
physicians that death was not caused by palliative interventions and treatment
abatement. Nonetheless, they heard sufficient professional and community
concern about the issue to take the same view as the Canadian senate, namely
that it was important to be specific in law, in order to prevent false perceptions of
what the law had to say in this area from obstructing appropriate care of dying
people. The House of Lords Select Committee on Medical Ethics, in 1994, also
endorsed double effect but did not recommend any legislation.57
The objects sections of the four Australian State and Territory pieces of
legislation which have been passed over the last decade on matters related to
death and dying all have significant comment to make about the issue of proper
pain and symptom control,58 but only the South Australian Act specifically
articulates and codifies the principle of double effect in this context. This is not to
suggest that there have been prosecutions of doctors for treatment abatement
decisions or palliative interventions, which there have not, nor to propose legal
remedies for clinical problems. Rather, if the law specifically articulates, in
statute, the priorities and parameters it sets for the care of dying people and
differentiates palliative care from euthanasia,59 this sends a powerful message to
practitioners and their teachers which may fundamentally influence such care for
the better. This holds even if the predicate about opioids and causation is inflated
and unsubstantiated.60
The Ontario coroner seems to have captured the essence of palliative care
practice, as the vast majority of its practitioners (internationally) see it, in laying
down four conditions which apply for palliative care interventions to be legal in
his jurisdiction, and these should be universally applicable:
(1) the care must be intended solely to relieve suffering; (2) it must be administered in response to
suffering or signs of suffering; (3) it must [be] commensurate with that suffering; and (4) it cannot be a
deliberate infliction of death. Documentation is required, and the doses must increase progressively.61
Modern palliative care practice standards are based on the notion that death is
natural in the sense of being a universal and unavoidable consequence of having
life, and that interventions or abatement decisions should neither hasten nor
prolong the dying process. The intention is to relieve symptoms and suffering,
not to bring forward the time of death. Whilst this position is sustainable in the
palliative phase, it is susceptible to challenge in the terminal phase, when death is
imminent (hours or days away).62 Signals that death is approaching may consist
of overt and covert acknowledgment by the patient that death is both inevitable
and imminent, and anticipatory grief behaviour on the part of patient, family,
significant others and carers. Clinical evidence may consist of declining appetite,
weight loss, recumbency, lassitude, physiological systems failure and disease
progression. There is an associated decrease in oral intake which usually ceases
altogether as the patient's conscious state lapses. It is both philosophically and
medically contentious to suggest that it is consistently possible to distinguish
between patients who are dying, and those who are not, but in medical practice it
is often necessary to attempt to do so.63 The distinction is not made on religious
or ethical grounds, but on biological and psychological observations, and no
suggestion is inferred that the dying days are of lesser worth than non-dying
ones, or that the dying have different rights to those which they previously
enjoyed before they were dying.
It is acknowledged that as death approaches, abatement of life-sustaining
treatment and terminal sedation may indeed alter the time of death, although this
matter cannot be verified scientifically, one way or the other, in a particular case,
or in general. There are serious limitations to the use of clinical studies in this
area, and the causal question itself cannot be directly asked in any interventional
study for obvious reasons. We cannot know when a particular patient would have
died in the absence of palliative interventions or treatment abatement,
particularly during the final dying process, and it would be unethical to design
randomised controlled trials to find out.
In the absence of formal training in palliative care, doctors' attitudes and
clinical behaviour are complex and variable, ranging from abrupt cessation of
treatment, minimalist palliative care and treatment directed at bringing about a
rapid dying process, to excessive caution about being seen to be instrumental in
causing the death, particularly with regard to the provision of pain and symptom
relief, cessation or non-initiation of artificial hydration and alimentation and
cardio-pulmonary resuscitation. Whilst a doctor's intention may not always be
easy to validate, evaluation of intention and motive are fundamental to legal
analysis, and many would argue that intention is also determinative of the moral
character of medical interventions.
Conclusion
There is almost universal support for the relief of pain and suffering, and
avoidance of prolongation of the process of dying. Public policy and the law
have, without known exception, endorsed these common sense principles. There
is also wide support for the cessation of life-sustaining measures in certain non-
dying persons, where it is clear that the intention is to bring about death, as for
instance those in a permanent and irreversible coma, or the persistent vegetative
state, such as in the case of Anthony Bland.64 However, there is deep division in
societies about whether assisted suicide and euthanasia65 should be made legal,
and the fundamental question is causal. Those who advocate such changes often
cite accepted palliative care practice in support of their position, on causal and
consequentialist grounds. The line of argument runs something like this: "if you
agree with the administration of opioids and sedatives, or treatment abatement
which even have the potential to alter the timing, and therefore the cause, of
death, how could you disagree with the administration of a lethal injection which
has the expressed intention of causing death?".
It is concluded that, as argued by Keyserlingk,66 narrow empirical causality,
applied in the setting of terminal care, cannot alone account for the distinction
between accepted palliative care practice and euthanasia. It is both false and
unhelpful if appropriate and skilfully administered and monitored pain and
symptom relief, together with the abatement of futile treatment in the context of
a person's dying process, are seen as causing death. Self-willed and planned
death, with or without third party assistance, surely has better arguments in its
favour anyway.
In the experience of caring and being cared for, both intention and honesty are
decisive. Palliative care must be clear about its intentions, and accept that there
are some occasions when the process of death is hastened, either unknowingly or
knowingly. Far from subverting its practice, this acknowledgment might liberate
it from wider claims of ambiguity on causal issues.
Divergence about whether third party assistance (medical or non-medical) to
die is permissible reveals a deep and complex fault line in modern western
democracies, as they chart their courses based more on individual conceptions of
liberty and autonomy than organised religion and deontological codes. This
process is ongoing and will not come to a sharp resolution. Societal energy should
be more focused on palliative care, about which we can nearly all agree and
where modest investments have yielded excellent results for patients and families
by improving care and decision-making at the end of life. There is much still to
do. Euthanasia should remain narrowly defined as "the deliberate action to
terminate life by someone other than, and at the request of, the patient
concerned",67 which is the matter at stake in the on-going societal debate.
The public needs to have complete confidence that there is a safe and morally
sound body of modern palliative care practice which is clearly and
unambiguously distinguished from euthanasia. Palliative care practitioners are
confident to give this reassurance. However, no matter what one's view of
euthanasia, it is important to unpack what is meant by the term "natural death".68
Causation can be an important analytical and reflective component of the process
of determining whether palliative care is ethical and, therefore, legal. However,
the concept of "natural" death, in the forensic sense of death without intervening
human agency, which is intrinsic to the palliative care position of causal
neutrality (neither hastening nor prolonging the process of dying), cannot be
empirically defended in all cases. Natural death can be understood in a broader
existential sense of inevitability, as a composite of causality, autonomy and
dignity, and not solely in terms of the presence or absence of human agency.
Perhaps one of contemporary medicine's biggest tasks is to embrace its
limitations, so well articulated by the New Zealand judge Thomas J in Auckland
AHA v A-G:
Medical science and technology has advanced for a fundamental purpose: the purpose of benefiting the
life and health of those who turn to medicine to be healed. It surely was never intended that it be used to
prolong biological life in patients bereft of the prospect of returning to an even limited exercise of human
life. Nothing in the inherent purpose of these scientific advances can require doctors to treat the dying as
if they were curable. Natural death has not lost its meaning or significance. It may be deferred, but it
need not be postponed indefinitely.69
Appendix to Chapter 11
The Australian Association for Hospice and Palliative Care Inc (AAHPC) issued
the following position statement on voluntary active euthanasia on 27 October
1995.
The Australian Association for Hospice and Palliative Care:
1. defines Hospice and Palliative Care as a concept of care which provides
coordinated medical, nursing and allied services for people who are
terminally ill, delivered where possible in the environment of the
person's choice, and which provides physical, psychological, emotional
and spiritual support for patients' families and friends. The provision of
hospice and palliative care services includes grief and bereavement
support for the family and other carers during the life of the patient,
continuing after death;
2. defines Voluntary Active Euthanasia (VAE) as the deliberate action to
terminate life by someone other than, and at the request of, the patient
concerned;
3. believes that dying is a natural process and that the refusal or
withdrawal of futile treatment is not voluntary active euthanasia;
4. believes that legalisation of voluntary euthanasia is not a substitute for
the proper provision of palliative care services to all Australians;
5. believes that public interest in voluntary active euthanasia reflects a
concern about lack of adequate support for people who are dying, and
will continue to campaign for improved services, education and research
in all aspects of palliative care;
6. states that currently accepted palliative care practice does not include
deliberate ending of life, even if this is requested by the patient;
7. asserts that palliative care experience shows that appropriate and
effective use of morphine and other drugs for pain relief does not cause
death;
8. recognises that there is a wide divergence of views about voluntary
active euthanasia in Australian society, and also within the caring
professions, including the palliative care community;
9. recognises and respects the fact that some people rationally and
consistently request voluntary active euthanasia;
10. acknowledges that, while pain and symptoms can be addressed,
complete relief is not always possible in all cases, even with optimal
palliative care;
11. welcomes open and frank discussion within the community, and
particularly with the health professions, about all aspects of death and
dying, including voluntary active euthanasia;
12. nevertheless, due to the inherent risk to individuals and society, opposes
all legalisation of euthanasia.
* Professor of Palliative Care in the Department of Medicine, Monash University, Director of Palliative
Care at McCulloch House, Monash Medical Centre, and Medical Director of the Cancer and
Palliative Care Program of the Southern Health Care network in Melbourne, Australia.
1 See M Ashby, "Palliative Care, Death Causation, Public Policy and the Law" (1998) 6 Progress in
Palliative Care 69; M Ashby, "Of Life and Death: the Canadian and Australian Senates on Palliative
Care and Euthanasia" (1997) 5 JLM 40; and M Ashby, "The Fallacies of Death Causation in Palliative
Care" (1997) 166 Medical Journal of Australia 176.
2 Compassion in Dying v Washington, 79 F 3d 790 (9th Cir 1996). quoted in GJ Annas, "The Promised
End - Constitutional Aspects of Physician-Assisted Suicide" (1996) 335 New England Journal of
Medicine 683.
3 J Gilbert & S Kirkham, "Double Effect, Double Bind or Double Speak" (1999) 13 Palliative Medicine 365.
4 H Kuhse et ai, "End of Life Decisions in Australian Medical Practice" (1997) 166 Medical Journal of
Australia 191.
5 J Van der Maas et al, "Euthanasia and Other Medical Decisions Concerning the End of Life" (1991) 338
Lancet 669; L Pijneneborg et al, "Nationwide Study of Decisions Concerning the End of Life in
General Practice in the Netherlands" (1994) 309 British Medical Journal 1209; P Van der Maas et al,
"Euthanasia, Physician-Assisted Suicide, and Other Medical Practices Involving the End of Life in the
Netherlands, 1990-1995" (1996) 335 New England Journal of Medicine 1699.
6 Ibid.
7 P Van der Maas et al, Euthanasia and Other Medical Decisions Concerning the End of Life, Elsevier,
Amsterdam, 1992.
8 Ibid.
9 By the demonstration of a such a high incidence of so-called medical decisions at the end of life (65 per
cent of the deaths studied by Kuhse et al, op cit, n4), that all have the same outcome of causing death,
it is presumably hoped that the case for the legalisation of voluntary active euthanasia is advanced by
undermining existing medical practice, which is thereby shown to be inconsistent in both its
principles and processes. Euthanasia accounted for 1.8 per cent of cases, and in 3.5 per cent life was
ended without the patient's request.
10 Kuhse et al, op cit, n4.
11 S Aranda & M O'Connor, "Euthanasia, Nursing and Care of the Dying; Rethinking Kuhse and Singer"
(1995) 3 Australian Nurses Journal 18.
12 See Raymond Williams' invaluable book Key Words: a Vocabulary of Culture and Society, rev edn,
Oxford University Press, New York, 1985, pp219-24 for consideration of the word "nature", which he
views as perhaps the most complex word in the English language. It is derived from the past
participle (natura) of the Latin verb nasci, to be born, Williams shows that, historically, the word
commences (like "culture") as a quality or process, defined by a specific reference, which later became
a noun. Williams identifies three areas of meaning: (i) the essential quality and character of
something, (ii) the inherent force which directs either the world or human beings or both; (iii) the
material world itself, taken as including or not including human beings.
13 See B Stoffell, "Orchestrating Death", in preparation.
14 M Reidenberg, "Barriers to Controlling Pain in Patients with Cancer" (1996) 347 Lancet 1278; and, M
Zenz & A Willweber-Strumpf, "Opiophobia and Cancer Pain in Europe" (1993) 341 Lancet 1075.
15 See Rita Carter, "Give a Drug a Bad Name," (1996) New Scientist, 6 April, 14. The introduction reads:
"Morphine is the world's most effective painkiller, yet because of its reputation as a dangerous drug it
is rarely prescribed even to terminally ill patients." This is, of course, untrue, but nonetheless, the
article highlighted the extent and depth of the negative attitudes and lack of knowledge concerning
the safety and efficacy of opioids, even in the United Kingdom, where palliative care is well
embedded, appearing in a scientific publication of the highest standing.
16 Asked if too many pain-killers shorten life, the results were (n=462): very true 11.7 per cent, somewhat
true 25 per cent, not at all true 28 per cent, don't know 35.3 per cent. M Ashby & M Wakefield,
"Attitudes to Some Aspects of Death and Dying, Living Wills and Substituted Health Care Decision-
making in South Australia: a Public Opinion Survey for a Parliamentary Select Committee" (1993) 7
Palliative Medicine 273.
17 M Wakefield, J Beilby & M Ashby, "General Practitioners and Palliative Care" (1993) 7 Palliative
Medicine 117.
18 J Porter & H Jack, "Addiction Rare in Patients Treated with Narcotics" (1980) 302 New England Journal
of Medicine 123.
19 Fallon, personal communication.
20 For the prevailing views on the use of opioids for non-malignant pain, from the Australian Pain Society
see: P Graziotti & R Goucke, "The Use of Oral Opioids in Patients with Chronic Non-malignant Pain"
(1997) 167 Medical Journal of Australia 30, and an editorial in that journal: A Molloy et al, "Role of
Opioids in Chronic Noncancer Pain" (1997) 167 Medical Journal of Australia 9. In Canada, see the
website of the Canadian Pain Society: "Use of opioid analgesics for the treatment of chronic
noncancer pain in a consensus statement and guidelines from the Canadian Pain Society"
<www.pulsus.com/Pain/03_04/opio_ed.htm>.
21 J Stjernsward & N Teoh, "The Cancer Pain Relief Programme of the World Health Organisation" (1989)
4 Palliative Medicine 1; R Twycross, Pain Relief in Advanced
Cancer, Churchill Livingstone, London, 1994; DF Zech et al, "Validation of World Health Organization
Guidelines for Cancer Pain Relief: a 10-year Prospective Study" (1995) 63 Pain 65; Expert Working
Group of the European Association for Palliative Care, "Morphine in Cancer Pain: Modes of
Administration" (1996) 312 British Medical Journal 823; and R Twycross et al, "A Survey of Pain in
Patients with Advanced Cancer" (1996) 12 Journal of Pain and Symptom Management 273.
22 M Ashby, "The Fallacies of Death Causation in Palliative Care" (1997) 166 Medical Journal of Australia
176; and D Mendelson, "Quill, Glucksberg and Palliative Care – Does Alleviation of Pain Necessarily
Hasten Death?" (1997) 5 Journal of Law and Medicine 110.
23 R v Adams [1957] Crim LR 365.
24 Devlin, Easing the Passing: The Trial of Dr John Bodkin Adams, The Bodley Head, London, 1985.
25 Named after the Brompton Hospital (a famous London postgraduate teaching hospital which specialises
in chest diseases). The mixture usually contained heroin, cocaine and alcohol, although its
composition has varied from one institution to another over the years. It was very extensively used
prior to the advent of the modern hospice/palliative care movement. The effects of these ingredients
include pain relief, but also "pharmacological oblivion", an attempt to relieve emotional and
"existential" pain and anxiety associated with the dying process by a seemingly contradictory
combination of mood modification (elevation) and sedation.
26 R v Cox (1992) 12 BMLR 38.
27 See the article by a British geriatrician, Gillian Craig and the author's riposte. G Craig, "On
Withholding Nutrition and Hydration in the Terminally Ill: has Palliative Medicine Gone too Far?"
(1994) 20 Journal of Medical Ethics 139; and M Ashby & B
Stoffell, "Artificial Hydration and Alimentation at the End of Life: a reply to Craig" (1995) 21 Journal of
Medical Ethics 135.
28 J Billings & S Block "Slow Euthanasia" (1996) 12 Journal of Palliative Care 21. See also the palliative
care riposte: B Mount "Morphine Drips, Terminal Sedation, and Slow Euthanasia: Definitions and
Facts, Not Anecdotes" (1996) 12 Journal of Palliative Care 31.
29 See Raymond Williams' invaluable book Key Words: a Vocabulary of Culture and Society, rev edn,
Oxford University Press, New York, 1985, ppl 15-17, for an account of the various meanings of
"empirical". Williams points out that the word is used, in English, in a medical context from the 16th
century onwards, to refer to treatment based on assessment of individual patient response, rather
than theory, which was the preserve of physicians. As such, the term had negative connotations,
alluding to quackery and unqualified practice. In science and philosophy, the term is used to denote
knowledge gained from experience, and hence experiment, rather than derived from reason. This
distinction is complex and derives substantially from the work of the English philosophers Locke and
Hume. In modern medical usage it can refer to treatment given on a "try and see" basis in individual
patients (usually with some theoretical mechanistic basis, but perhaps without the existence of good
supporting evidence – a practice which is also often seen as "unscientific" and lacking in rigour),
or, perhaps paradoxically, it can refer to the scientific (experimental) tradition itself. In a legal context it
appears to be used to describe facts of a case known through human experience, hence through the
senses, a use in harmony with mainstream western scientific tradition.
30 Danuta Mendelson, personal communication.
31 D Mendelson, Torts, 2nd edn, Butterworths, Sydney, 2000.
32 The "but for" test in law asks whether the damage or harm would have occurred but for the (plaintiff's)
wrongful act, and serves to eliminate matters which could not have been the causes of the (plaintiff's)
damage (other expressions include causa sine qua non, literally "the cause without which",
"proximate cause" or "real effective cause").
33 D Mendelson, "Medico-Legal Aspects of the 'Right to Die' Legislation in Australia" (1993) 19 MULR 112.
For further reading, see D Mendelson, op cit, n31.
34 Eg, R v Cox, op cit, n26.
35 P Skegg, "Drugs Hastening Death" in Law, Ethics and Medicine: Studies in Medical Law, Clarendon
Press, Oxford, 1984, 121; and P Skegg, "Pain-killing Drugs and the Law of Homicide" (1995) 4 Otago
Bioethics Report 8.
36 Parliament of the Commonwealth of Australia, Senate Legal and Constitutional Legislation Committee,
Consideration of Legislation Referred to the Committee. Euthanasia Laws Bill 1996, Canberra, 1997,
29.
37 D Casswell, "Rejecting Criminal Liability for Life-shortening Palliative Care" (1990) 6 Journal of
Contemporary Health Law and Policy 127.
38 Note the specific provision in the criminal law of New Zealand re negligent homicide (Freckelton,
personal communication).
39 P Skegg, op cit, n 35.
40 M Otlowski, Voluntary Euthanasia and the Common Law, Oxford University Press, Oxford, 1997. C
Corns, "Withdrawal of Life-support: Some Criminal Prosecution Aspects" in I Freckelton & K
Petersen (eds), Controversies in Health Law, Federation Press, Sydney, 1999, pp44-59.
41 P Singer, Rethinking Life and Death, Text, Melbourne, 1994.
42 J Corner, "More Openness Needed in Palliative Care" (1997) 315 British Medical Journal 1242.
43 T Quill, "The Rule of Double Effect – a Critique of Its Role in End-of-Life Decision-Making" (1997) 337
New England Journal of Medicine 1768.
44 R Hunt, "Palliative Care: the Rhetoric-Reality Gap" in H Kuhse (ed), Willing to Listen, Wanting to Die,
Penguin, Melbourne, 1994, 115; and R Hunt, "Taking Responsibility for Affecting the Time of Death"
(1999) 13 Palliative Medicine 439.
45 A Mullens, Timely Death. Considering Our Last Rights, Alfred A Knopf, Toronto. 1996.
46 E Keyserlingk, "Assisted Suicide, Causality and the Supreme Court of Canada" (1994) 39 McGill L J 708.
47 Airedale NHS Trust v Bland [1993] All ER 868.
48 Keyserlingk, op cit, n46.
49 J Stapleton "Perspectives on Causation" in J Horder (ed), Oxford Essays in Jurisprudence, Oxford
University Press, Oxford, 2000; and J Stapleton, Chapter 2, above.
50 M Somerville, "Euthanasia by Confusion" (1997) 20 NSWLJ 550-75.
51 Ibid, p564.
52 ibid.
53 Ibid, p565.
54 Ibid, p567.
55 Ibid, p568.
56 Consent to Medical Treatment and Palliative Care Act 1995 (SA): "The Care of People Who are Dying –
17. (1) A medical practitioner responsible for the treatment and care in the terminal phase of a
terminal illness, or a person participating in the treatment and care of the patient under the medical
practitioner's supervision, incurs no civil or criminal liability by administering medical treatment
with the intention of relieving pain or distress – (a) with the consent of the patient or of patient's
representative; and (b) in good faith and without negligence; and (c) in accordance with proper
professional standards of palliative care, even though an incidental effect of the treatment is to hasten
the death of the patient. (2) A medical practitioner responsible for the treatment or care of a patient
in the terminal phase of a terminal illness, or a person participating in the treatment or care of the
patient under the medical practitioner's supervision, is, in the absence of an express direction by the
patient or the patient's representative to the contrary, under no duty to use, or to continue to use, life
sustaining measures in treating the patient if the effect of doing so would be merely to prolong life in
a moribund state without any real prospect of recovery or in a persistent vegetative state. (3) For the
purposes of the law of the State – (a) the administration of medical treatment for the relief of pain or
distress in accordance with subsection (1) does not constitute cause of death; and (b) the
nonapplication or discontinuance of life sustaining measures in accordance with subsection (2) does
not constitute a cause of death."
57 House of Lords, Report of Select Committee on Medical Ethics, HMSO, London, 1994.
58 See eg Medical Treatment Act 1988 (Vic), Preamble: "(e) to encourage community and professional
understanding of the changing focus of treatment from cure to pain relief for terminally-ill patients;
and (f) to ensure that dying patients receive maximum relief from pain and suffering." Consent to
Medical Treatment and Palliative Care Act 1995 (SA), Part 1, s3: "(c) to allow for the provision of
palliative care, in accordance with proper standards, to people who are dying and to protect them
from medical treatment that is intrusive, burdensome and futile."
59 See Corns, op cit, n40.
60 This "educational" role for the law is interesting, an expanded role which the author thinks is
worthwhile, but one that may trouble some legal "purists". See T Faunce & B McSherry, "Chinese
Whispers: Judicial Narratives and the Regulation of Clinical Medicine" (1997) 4 JLM 326.
61 Dr James Young, the Ontario Coroner in 1997 quoted in: Senate of Canada, Of Life and Death: Report of
Special Senate Committee on Euthanasia and Assisted Suicide (Ottawa, 1995); and JV Lavery and P
Singer, "The 'Supremes' Decide on Assisted Suicide: What Should a Doctor Do?" (1997) 157 Canadian
Medical Association Journal 405.
62 For a description of these three phases of illness and goals of care: curative, palliative and terminal, see:
M Ashby & B Stoffell, "Therapeutic Ratio and Defined Phases: Proposal of an Ethical Framework for
Palliative Care" (1991) 302 British Medical Journal 1322.
63 Certain American writers who have expressed fairly strong conservative and religiously-based
"sanctity of life" arguments against most treatment abatement decisions, such as Ramsey, Dyck,
Grisez and Barry cited in Weir, pp271-4, nonetheless recognise the process of dying. R Weir, Abating
Treatment with Critically III Patients. Ethical and Legal Limits to the Prolongation of Life, Oxford
University Press, New York, 1989.
64 Airedale NHS Trust v Bland [1993] All ER 821.
65 Defined by the peak body Palliative Care Australia as "the deliberate action to terminate life by
someone other than, and at the request of, the patient concerned". Australian Association for Hospice
and Palliative Care Inc (AAHPC). "Voluntary Euthanasia – Position Statement", 27 October 1995, The
Association, Perth, 1995. (See appendix).
66 Keyserlingk, op cit, n46.
67 Weir, op cit, n63.
68 The use of the term "natural" is ubiquitous in medicine, but its meanings are diverse and ill-defined:
natural history means the course of a disease without treatment, natural causes means death absent
human agency, natural therapy means treatment with natural (as opposed to man-made) substances.
So-called "natural death" acts were passed in most states of the United States during the 1970-80s,
starting with Natural Death Act 1976 (California) (for a comprehensive list of legislation in US
jurisdictions as of 1992, see P Hill & D Shirley, A Good Death. Taking More Control at the End of
Your Life Choice in Dying, The National Council for the Right to Die, Addison Wesley, New York,
1992). Two such statutes were passed in Australia: in South Australia, Natural Death Act 1983 (SA).
and the Northern Territory of Australia, Natural Death Act 1988 (NT). The Natural Death Act 1983
(SA) was repealed by the Consent to Medical Treatment and Palliative Care Act 1995 (SA). The
provisions of these "natural death" acts allow persons to make binding "living wills" to prevent them
being subjected to life-sustaining medical treatment when incompetent, if the underlying condition is
terminal and/or irreversible. There is an underlying theme of the need to bolster patients' rights to
refuse treatment, redressing a past power imbalance, seen as being in favour of "paternalistic"
doctors. The ethical and theoretical derivation of "natural death" in this context therefore appears to
be focused on death absent human agency, and hence a causal construct. See also, for instance, the
quote from the British Columbia Crown Counsel Policy Guidelines: "withholding or withdrawing
treatment means ... discontinuing or not intervening with medical procedures to prolong life beyond
its natural length." (emphasis added). Senate of Canada, Of Life and Death: Report of Special Senate
Committee on euthanasia and assisted suicide, Ottawa, 1995, at 40. For a discussion of natural causes
of death in a respirator withdrawal case see: B Schneiderman, "A Winnipeg Inquest: a Case of
Natural Death or Physician Assisted Suicide?" (1996) 24 Manitoba Law Journal 365. See also B Stoffel
& MA Ashby, "On Natural Death and Palliative care" in L Shotton (ed), Health Care Law and Ethics,
Social Science Press, Katoomba, 1997, 163, at 164: "'Natural death' cannot be used without careful
explication. It can be understood as a composite of two moral elements: patient self determination
and avoidance of harm; that is, the priority of patient choice in determining what they personally
find acceptable treatments in the terminal phase of an illness, plus the avoidance of certain
obstructions to the process of dying. The first element is of course the one that the law is interested in
protecting, whereas the latter will demand close scrutiny of treatment decisions ...."
69 Auckland AHA v AG [1993] 1 NZLR 235.