Part D:
Causation in Forensic Medicine and
Coronial Law
14 Cause in Forensic Pathology: The
Cause and Manner of Death
STEPHEN CORDNER*
Introduction
The attribution of "cause" in forensic pathology is a fascinating subject about
which too little has been written.1 It is one particular area, amongst many, of
confusion at the dynamic interface of law and medicine. One reason for this
confusion is that those involved have to grapple with (at least) two different
conceptions of cause: that used in medicine and that in law. This chapter has been
written from a medical perspective – and the lawyers amongst the readers will
have to take from it what they can!
The chapter begins by outlining the terrain covered by forensic pathology and
the main features in the landscape. It then briefly looks at the medical
certification of the cause of death by doctors generally, before unwrapping some
of the issues peculiar to forensic pathology. The main aim is to arrive at
something like a coherent schema for the attribution of the cause of death
following autopsy. While in most cases this is straightforward, in some it is not,
and in those cases I do not think the discipline of forensic pathology has a
uniform approach. This is not surprising as the attribution of cause, particularly
in retrospect and in as complex and unpredictable field as biology, is essentially a
philosophical question. During the course of this chapter examples of the issues
arising in a number of cases will illustrate the breadth of the forensic
pathologist's contribution and the complexity of the associated causal issues,
which, it must be said, are sometimes not appreciated by either pathologists or
lawyers.
Forensic Pathology – The Terrain
Forensic pathology is the application of the principles and practice of pathology
to the needs of the courts or, more generally, the law. Pathology is the study of
disease and forensic pathology is a subdiscipline of anatomical pathology (or
what was once known as morbid anatomy). Anatomical pathology has left its
morbid anatomical roots and concentrates in the main on surgical and biopsy
pathology. Forensic pathology on the other hand is a mortuary-based speciality
which provides the knowledge base for the performance of autopsies in deaths
reported to coroners (or their equivalents in countries with other forms of death
investigation systems).
At the outset, it is important to appreciate the scope of the forensic autopsy.
The aims of this part of a death investigation are:
To discover, describe and record all the pathological processes present in
the deceased and, where necessary, the identifying characteristics of the
deceased;
With knowledge of the medical history and circumstances of the death, to
come to conclusions about the cause of death and factors contributing to
death and, where necessary, the identity of the deceased;
In situations where the circumstances of death are unknown or in
question, to apply the autopsy findings and conclusions to the
reconstruction of those circumstances. This will, on occasions, involve
attendance at the scene of death, preferably with the body in situ; and
To record the positive, and relevant negative, observations and findings in
such a way as to enable another forensic pathologist at another time to
independently come to his or her own conclusions about the case. As
forensic pathology is essentially a visual exercise, this involves the use of
good quality, and preferably colour, photographs.2
Encapsulated in this approach to the forensic autopsy are two consequences at
odds with a common perception of the specialty. Firstly, forensic pathology could
be regarded as the "what happened" specialty (and not the "whodunnit"
specialty). It is as part of this that the pathologist is concerned to come to the best
conclusion about the cause of death, However, and this is the second
consequence, in pursuit of answers to "what happened", conclusions about the
cause of other findings on or in the body, or at the scene, or of events described in
witness statements, may require the pathologist to attribute "cause" in areas other
than the cause of death. Provided the pathologist keeps to his or her expertise,
this is a quite proper exercise.
Certification of Cause of Death Without Autopsy
There is, however, a preliminary area which needs a little exploration. Every fully
registered medical practitioner is imbued, by law, with the authority to "sign a
death certificate". The function of the certification of the cause of death by
doctors is poorly appreciated. In policy terms, it originated as part of the British
Government's response in the 1820s and 1830s to the outrages of Burke and Hare.
Together with a requirement to report deaths to coroners, the Registration of
Births Deaths and Marriages Act 1836 (UK) meant that no body could be buried
lawfully without a doctor certifying an opinion as to the cause of death. Thus,
certification of the cause of death originated as a means of controlling or
detecting hidden homicide. A side benefit (and a major one) was the collection of
epidemiological data about why people were dying. As a tool for accurate
information of this kind, however, death certificates are notoriously inaccurate,
with numerous studies establishing error rates of as much as 20-30 per cent in the
major condition reported as causing death.3 These rates have not altered, either
historically or more recently, with advances in investigative and diagnostic
technology. Many people find this hard to believe, but forensic pathologists –
amongst others – know it to be true. That such error rates exist is not to be
critical of one's clinical colleagues. Concluding the cause of death without the
benefit of autopsy means that one is relying on the medical history and little else.
The clinician cannot take a history of the period immediately before death, which
is often riot witnessed, is limited to an external examination of the body and the
only special test – an autopsy – is generally not available. It is perhaps surprising
that clinicians certify correctly as many causes of death as they do.
Writing death certificates can be tricky in some circumstances, and the
following example shows how confusions may arise.
Case 1
Mr H was 75years old and suffering from metastatic lung cancer; that is, cancer of the lungs which had
spread, in his case, to involve brain, liver and ribs. These were the cause of convulsions (fits), hemiplegia
("stroke") and pain. He was admitted to a hospital for palliative care. At the time of admission a Refusal
of Treatment Certificate, in the form of Schedule 1 of the Medical Treatment Act 1988 (Victoria), was
properly completed. This recorded Mr H's decision to refuse both medical treatment generally and
artificial hydration. He also requested complete relief of pain and suffering with analgesics and sedation.
Combinations of varying amounts of these drugs were prescribed and administered. He appeared to be
comfortable and deeply asleep, but rousable. On the third day after admission, he became unconscious (ie
not rousable) and he died on the fourth day.
The treating doctor reported the death to the coroner believing it to be possibly a suicide. This was on the
basis, it seemed, that Mr H had refused medical treatment including artificial hydration and that this,
together with the drugs prescribed and administered at Mr H's request, had hastened death. The treating
doctor gave the cause of death as:
CAUSE OF DEATH
(a) Dehydration
Disease or condition directly leading to death.*
(b) Refusal of
Antecedent causes (morbid conditions, if any, giving rise to
fluids
the above cause, stating the underlying condition last).
(a) Sedation
Other significant conditions (contributing to the death but not
(b) Metastatic
related to the disease or condition causing it).
Carcinoma of
lung
* This means the disease, injury or complication which caused death not only, for
example, the mode of dying such as "heart failure, asthenia" etc
One needs to understand the form of the cause of death to appreciate what the
treating doctor is saying (whether wittingly or unwittingly). The cause is divided
into I and II. "I" is the direct cause of death or the disease or condition directly
leading to death. "I" is subdivided, if necessary, into a, b and c (and theoretically d
and e etc if necessary; it very rarely is). "I(a)" is due to or a result of "I(b)" and so
on. The last listed condition under "I" is the main, central or underlying cause of
the patient's death. "II" represents those other significant conditions contributing
to the death but not directly related to the disease or condition causing it.
This is the internationally accepted form that tends to want singular particular
causes of death (which makes coding, classification and statistics easier) and does
not invite multiple causes. There is an undefined distinction drawn between
cause ("I(a), (b)" above) and contribution ("II(a), (b)" above) that is essentially
arbitrary where the latter is some form of lesser cause of death.
On this basis, the treating doctor in this case is saying that the underlying
cause of Mr H's death is his refusal of fluids. This clearly cannot be right. Any
correct statement of the underlying cause of Mr H's death must refer to his
terrible metastatic cancer. The doctor is probably correct that the refusal of fluids
has hastened Mr H's death as did the sedation, but Mr H was already very
seriously and terminally ill.
There is no doubt in my mind that the doctor could (and in my view, should)
have completed a death certificate in this case, and not reported it to the coroner,
as it was a death from natural causes. All the elements of the cause of death were
the natural consequences of properly authorised sedation and pain relief, of
properly authorised refusal of artificial hydration and of his underlying disease.
The cause of death might have read:
I(a) Probable dehydration and bronchopneumonia following sedation in a man with metastatic
carcinoma of the lung (brain, liver, ribs).
Admittedly this is a complicated example. It emphasises the gatekeeper role of
medical practitioners generally in relation to the investigation of deaths and their
causes. In doing so, they apply their own understanding of cause to the 90 per
cent of deaths that never come to the attention of the forensic pathologist.
This understanding is sometimes imperfect. For example, the cause of death
will on occasions be certified simply as "cardio-respiratory arrest". This is a
manifestation or a description of the body's cessation of function, not the reason
or cause underlying this cessation of function. Generally speaking, however, I
believe the medical profession discharges its obligations in this area well and has
a good instinctive understanding of those deaths which, because of their cause or
manner, should be reported to the coroner and those in which a medical
certificate of the cause of death can be completed. Only rarely will the latter
result in issues for evaluation by lawyers or a court. The cause of death is not
often a contentious issue in litigation, and when it is there will almost always
have been an autopsy. It is to these cases that I now turn.
Deciding the Cause of Death Following Autopsy
Deciding the cause of death is a fundamental responsibility for all anatomical
pathologists after autopsy. The responsibility is greatest for forensic pathologists,
yet very little has been written about the criteria that need to be satisfied to make
a decision. This issue causes confusion in some court cases because both
pathologists and lawyers fail to appreciate the philosophy of causation. Leaving
aside the minority of cases where the lesion observed at autopsy is incompatible
with life (eg decapitation), what in fact usually happens in coming to a
conclusion is that a cause of death discovered at autopsy, which accords with the
medical history and circumstances, is elevated to the cause of death. In general
terms, the pathologist makes a subjective decision that a certain autopsy finding
is capable of leading to death, and that this is consistent with the deceased's
medical history and circumstances of death. Furthermore, a conclusion about the
cause of death (unlike many medical diagnoses) is retrospective and cannot be
tested. These problems emphasise the need to discover all the pathological
processes present in the deceased before considering them in relation to the
medical history and the circumstances of death.
Causation: Philosophy and Problems
David Hume (1711-1776) believed that for something to be the cause it must be
both sufficient and necessary for the effect: X is always followed by Y, and Y
never occurs unless X occurred. John Stuart Mill (1806-1873) disagreed, and
thought that the cause was the sum total of the conditions in which an event
occurred: it was not correct to isolate one of the conditions in which an event
occurred as the exclusive cause. To Hume, the statement "the rising of the sun
causes daylight", would have been reasonable, since the rising of the sun is
always followed by daylight, and daylight never comes about unless the rising of
the sun has occurred. The statement is, in fact, incomplete because daylight could
not occur unless there was an atmosphere. Mill's approach would include an
atmosphere in any statement about what caused daylight because it is one of the
conditions in which the event occurs.
The restrictiveness of Hume can be seen in the commonest cause of death in
the western world: coronary atherosclerosis ("hardening of the arteries of the
heart", "heart disease", "heart attack", "myocardial infarction"). The development
of coronary atherosclerosis is not always followed by death, and death does not
occur only when coronary atherosclerosis has developed. Yet clearly it is a
reasonable proposition that coronary atherosclerosis has been the pathological
basis for an enormous number of deaths. It seems that Hume's approach is suited
more to those cases where the cause of death is incompatible with life. This is not
to say that Mill's approach is necessarily the complete answer. Take the example
of the heavy smoker who dies of carcinoma of the lung. One of the conditions in
which the death occurred is smoking, bat there are more: a person may smoke
because of the effect of advertising, because of parents' smoking, because of
particular personality traits, and so on ad absurdum. Pathologists (and in some
cases, courts) have to make a practical decision that cause stops somewhere. In
general, the line is drawn at the "medical" cause of death but, as the example
shows, this may be unsatisfactory: smoking is increasingly noted on death
certificates. This, of course, raises the interesting question of whether such deaths
are truly "natural".
Pathologists have some instinctive understanding of these issues but there are
particular sorts of cases where the difficulties are even greater. If Mill's approach
is to be the basis of a coherent schema for the attribution of cause, let us see how
it works in the various types of difficult cases that confront the forensic
pathologist.
Types of Cases Where Concluding the Cause of Death
is Difficult
Substantial delay between injury and death
Case 2
Injury or disease not sufficient in itself to cause death, but death has occurred.
One of the classical causal problems is that of pulmonary embolus and its relation
to antecedent events.
Mr A was a postmaster of 57 with a history of chronic bronchitis and emphysema, associated with
smoking. He was threatened in his office by a mart with a knife and was stabbed in the back of the chest
when he refused to hand over arty money. Taken to hospital, he seemed in good condition and because of
his past history of chronic airways disease, he was managed conservatively. Management included a
chest drain and close observation. 24 hours after admission, he had a cardiovascular collapse from which
he was resuscitated, but which left him with bilateral parietal lobe infarction. Intensive physiotherapy
restored the patient to limited mobility, and he was discharged five weeks after admission. One week later
he collapsed and died in his bathroom.
The autopsy disclosed:
1. Stab wound scar on the posterior pleura (ie the stab wound definitely
entered the pleural – chest – cavity).
2. Massive bilateral pulmonary thromboembolism ("clot on the lung")
3. Deep vein thrombosis of calf ("clots in the leg").
4. Chronic bronchitis and emphysema (the consequences of smoking).
5. Diffuse myocardial fibrosis and coronary atherosclerosis (ie ischaemic
heart disease, the commonest form of heart disease in the western
world).
6. Unsuspected adenocarcinoma of the rectum with liver metastases (ie
cancer which had spread).
The case was proceeded with as a homicide, the cause of death having been
given as:
1 (a) Pulmonary thromboembolism in a man with chronic bronchitis and emphysema and metastatic
carcinoma of the rectum, six weeks after being stabbed in the chest leading to cardiovascular collapse
and cerebral infarction.
Part of the opinion included in the necropsy report was that the stab wound
a
chain
culminated
events
in
initiated
of
pulmonary
the
which
thromboembolism. This opinion was provided in the face of the knowledge that
the first presentation of metastatic carcinoma of the rectum could well be deep
vein thrombosis of the calf and pulmonary thromboembolism. (It is also
important to appreciate that the stab wound and the subsequent cardiovascular
collapse which it precipitated by virtue of some haemorrhage and a small
pneumothorax on a background of chronic bronchitis and emphysema, could
well lead to deep vein thrombosis and pulmonary thromboembolism.) The
original thrust of the defence indeed was that the deep vein thrombosis and
subsequent pulmonary embolus could have been caused by the carcinoma of the
rectum, and it was unnecessary to attribute any contribution to death from the
stab wound and its consequences. This is Hume's approach to causation, which
seeks particular and singular causes. This approach is encapsulated in the
following question to the pathologist relied upon by the prosecution: "But Doctor,
you cannot exclude, can you, that this man died from a complication of his
metastatic cancer, a well-recognised complication I might add, and that the stab
wound might have had nothing to do with it?"
The answer, based on Mill, is that there are multiple causes in this case, and no
way of apportioning weight to each. A corollary of this is that no one cause (eg
the stabbing and its consequences) can be discarded as having no weight. In this
case, there is an interaction between various factors: a man with these pre-
existing conditions (heart disease, chronic bronchitis, emphysema and metastatic
cancer) who is stabbed in the chest would be more likely to get a deep vein
thrombosis and die from pulmonary thromboembolism than one who was not
stabbed in the chest. On this basis, a pathologist cannot agree to exclude the
stabbing from the cause of this man's death. Responsibility cannot be apportioned
between the stabbing and the cancer, but the opinion must be that both are
involved in causing death. It is useful in such cases to have some idea of Hume's
and Mill's principles, since difficulties that arise will tend to arise from an
application of Hume's principles.
The accused in this case was tried for manslaughter at The Old Bailey. A
defence submission at the conclusion of the prosecution case, that the prosecution
had not established that the actions of the accused had caused the patient's death,
was accepted by the judge. The submission at this stage was that the contribution
of the stab wound was so minor compared to the metastatic cancer that it should
be disregarded. When asked about this, the prosecution pathologist had declined
to apportion any particular weight to either, simply emphasising that both had to
be included in any statement purporting to encapsulate why death occurred. The
defence submission was accepted. The accused was convicted of a wounding
charge and sentenced to a term of 15 years imprisonment.
In some cases of a pulmonary thromboembolus following some time after an
injury and period of immobilisation, the suggestion will be made that the
condition can occur spontaneously and therefore the injury did not cause death.
A deep vein thrombosis and pulmonary thromboembolus can only be considered
spontaneous if an autopsy fails to discover an adequate explanation. If an
adequate explanation is discovered, then there is no need to resort to calling the
embolus spontaneous (in reality, a synonym for "idiopathic" which means "of no
apparent cause").
Non-fatal injury precipitates death in a setting of natural
disease
Sudden death during a fight where the only findings at necropsy are some bruises
and coronary atherosclerosis is common. The pathological cause of death will be
given as coronary atherosclerosis and the legal process will require an opinion
about any relationship between the fight and the cause of death. Linking the
death to exertion during the fight may have substantial legal consequences as the
survivor, if the aggressor, may be charged with manslaughter (or, in other
jurisdictions, a homicide-related offence). At the trial, the pathologist will almost
certainly be asked the Hume-type question "But doctor, could not this man have
died at any time?". While it can be agreed in general that a person with this
degree of atherosclerosis is at risk from sudden death, in this particular case the
death cannot be separated from the circumstances in which it occurred. That is,
the exertion and emotional impact of being in a fight increased his heart rate and
blood pressure, putting a stress on the diseased heart which it was unable to
withstand. In this way, the fight (or the exertion and other physiological effects of
being involved in the fight) precipitated or caused his death from his underlying
heart disease. Again, it can be seen that this approach follows Mill's view that
cause is the sum of the conditions in which the event occurred.
A peculiarity of the victim renders a survivable injury fatal
Case 3
This is a variation of the preceding category. In English-derived legal systems, it
has traditionally been a rule that assailants take their victims as they are.4 This
has the consequence that if the victim has a bleeding disorder which would turn
a normally non-fatal injury into a fatal one, that does not diminish the
responsibility of the assailant for causing death (although it will obviously affect
the outcome of a trial or sentence).
Mr J, 45, lived alone and was on warfarin (a "blood thinner") after cardiovascular surgery. He was sitting
on a park bench when he was involved in an argument with the co-occupier of the bench. The description
from eyewitnesses was that Mr J 's face was pushed, causing him to fall off the end of the bench onto the
grass. The assailant then left. Mr J was found unconscious at home two days later and was dead on
arrival at hospital. The cause of death was subdural haemorrhage (bleeding over the brain). No scalp or
facial bruises were present, but there were five large scattered bruises on the chest and legs. That the
medication contributed to this man's demise could not be denied. In fact, the assailant was not even
proceeded against in this particular case, since it was felt that even had Mr J survived and complained to
the police the assailant would not have been charged with assault. (Not everyone would agree with that
logic. A pickpocket taking a wallet in ignorance of its contents will probably be charged if it happened to
contain $100,000 and may not even be chased if it was empty.)
Had this case gone to court there would also have been questions of fact
making it difficult to relate the assault to the subdural haemorrhage. Unless there
was good evidence that clinical deterioration could be related directly to the
assault, it may have been difficult to refute the following argument by defence
counsel: "Well, Doctor, we admit pushing Mr J off the bench, but you can't say
whether or not he fell on the way home or possibly even turned his head sharply
when something caught his eye. Because trivial trauma (which is the
prosecution's case) could have precipitated his fatal subdural haemorrhage, it is
possible that it was some other trivial trauma which initiated the fatal chain of
events in this case."
Decomposition Obscures the Effects of Injuries or
Disease
Case 4
Forensic pathologists have encountered numerous cases where much or all of the
pathological evidence has been obliterated by putrefaction. The greatest
difficulties arise when there is the possibility of foul play.
Mrs B, a woman of 70, came to stay with her 45 year old daughter and son-in-law. The relationship
between mother and daughter was stormy and included, over the fortnight of the stay, a number of
scuffles. According to the daughter, one night Mrs B was unwell and she stayed downstairs in the
armchair. In the morning, Mrs B was found dead, but because of the number of bruises from the scuffles,
the daughter was afraid she would get into trouble. She decided not to tell anyone, covered her mother up
with blankets and a sheet of plastic, and pulled the chair over towards the heater. Five days later, when
the smell had become too much, she went to a lawyer who advised her to contact the police. Every scrap of
paper in the house was covered with the daughter's description of her hate for her mother.
The autopsy findings were:
1. Advancing putrefaction with greenish/purple discolouration of all body
compartments and bloating.
2. Numerous abrasions and widely scattered bruises.
3. Severely fractured larynx:
(a) Fractured right hyoid bone cornu.
(b) Fractured right thyroid cartilage cornu.
(c) Bilateral fractures of the cricoid cartilage.
(These are the main cartilaginous and bony structures of the larynx
or neck.)
4. Multiple fractured ribs and fractured sternum (breast bone).
5. Severe coronary atherosclerosis (ie the common form of heart disease in
the western world).
None of the injuries to the larynx or chest was associated with bruising, and
therefore they could not he differentiated from injuries occurring after death. The
daughter specifically denied that she or anyone else interfered with the body
after death. Nothing happened to the body on its way to the mortuary or in the
mortuary, and the neck was dissected in situ to identify the fractures (obviating
the possible criticism that the autopsy itself may have caused the fractures), The
conclusion thus arose that the fractures occurred in life, precipitating death so
quickly as to minimise the bruising in the neck, which was then altered by
putrefaction. (It is known that putrefaction can so alter bruises that they are not
detectable.) Death could have occurred rapidly either as a direct result of the neck
injuries themselves or because the injuries and the circumstances of their
occurrence put a severe strain on the already diseased heart resulting in death.
The cause of death was given as:
1(a) Multiple laryngeal fractures, multiple rib fractures, and a fractured sternum in an elderly woman
with severe coronary atherosclerosis.
The report stated that the cause was conditional upon nothing having
happened to the body after death, and that the court would have to be satisfied
about this before it could accept the cause of death as given. The prosecution felt
that because of the daughter's mental state, it could not rely on her evidence that
she had not interfered with the body after death. Having admitted assaulting her
mother, she was sentenced to six months imprisonment. Had it been possible to
perform the autopsy in this case before the onset of decomposition, the timing of
the neck and chest injuries would probably have been apparent and the main
issue in this case, an issue of causation, therefore would have been resolved.
The Humean approach, not actually followed by the defence in this case,
would have been to propose the following:
Look Doctor, the one thing you can say in this case is that the deceased woman had severe coronary
artery disease. Depending on the circumstances the injuries could have occurred before or after death;
you cannot actually say as a forensic pathologist that the injuries occurred in life. Surely the only
conclusion that you can properly come to is that this woman probably died of her heart disease.
A reasonable response from the pathologist might have been along these lines:
I agree that a correct statement about the cause of this woman's death should make reference to her
coronary artery disease. While it is true that I cannot say as a matter of pathology that the injuries
observed occurred in life, the injuries are present. I simply put into the middle of the court room the
obvious statement that if the injuries did not occur after death then they occurred during life and there
are good reasons in this case why the appearance of the injuries is not what would normally be expected
of those occurring in life. If the injuries occurred during life then, in my view, they are of such severity
that they should be included in any statement purporting to accurately convey the cause of her death.
Cause is Completely Dependent Upon Interpretation
of Circumstances
Case 5
Occasionally, the cause of death is completely dependent upon an interpretation
of the circumstances.
Mr A was a 29 year old man with no known previous illnesses. He was working with electrical machinery
when he suddenly collapsed and died. His workmates thought he had been electrocuted although others in
contact with the same machine had no shock. The results of the examination of the machinery were
controversial; government inspectors saying that it was conceivable that the machine had been
electrically alive, electrical engineers retained by the factory saying it was not. At autopsy, there were no
marks of electrocution. The only positive finding was appreciable hydrocephalus ("water on the brain " or
dilatation of the ventricles of the brain) but no acute cerebral oedema (or brain swelling). Some basal
meningeal thickening suggested the hydrocephalus may have been secondary to meningitis in infancy or
childhood. There were no abnormal histological or toxicological findings.
If it is assumed that uncomplicated hydrocephalus (as in this case) can cause
sudden unexpected death (a matter of some dispute at the inquest), it is easy to
see that the cause of death is completely dependent on the assessment of the
machinery by electrical experts. Even the assessment of the circumstances
contained causal issues because the inspectors, who said it was conceivable that
the machine could become electrically live, could not say that it actually had
been.
Case 6
Baby A was 3 months old and left in the care of a local authority nursery. It was windy and snow was on
the ground. She was left outside in a pram unattended for 3 hours. When she was fetched in, it was found
that she was dead. There were no significant pathological findings at autopsy.
At the time, the definition of the Sudden Infant Death Syndrome (SIDS) was
basically the sudden unexpected death of an infant in whom a thorough autopsy
failed to find any adequate pathological cause for the death. The pathologist in
this case accordingly gave the cause of death as SIDS. However, another
pathologist at the inquest correctly pointed out that death from exposure (or
hypothermia) in infants may leave no signs; the better conclusion, so the
pathologist continued, would have been to say that the cause of death could not
be ascertained, and then to have discussed the extent to which the exposure may
have been involved in this death by a consideration of the circumstances. (The
local authority in this case made a moderately sized ex gratia payment to the
family following the inquest.)
Case 7
While this case was not completely dependent upon the interpretation of the
circumstances, it certainly played a large part.
Mr F was 33 years old and was severely overweight (Height: 1.85 M. Weight: 120 kgs). He was in receipt of
benefits following a back injury at work causing him unremitting pain which was being managed by
analgesic drugs. On this particular weekend his back pain was especially bad and he visited three
different doctors receiving three different prescriptions of pain killers including pethidine, oxycodone and
morphine.
Subsequent events were described by his wife and can be summarised as
follows:
In the afternoon, Mr F appeared to her to be "really dopey". He was able
to speak and eat but he was clearly affected by drugs and this was not
uncommon when he self-medicated with pethidine.
Later that evening when his wife returned from work, he was snoring
very loudly.
He was lying on his front on the bed with his head into the pillow.
She was concerned with his position so she removed the pillow and
moved his head to the side. He did not wake up.
He continued to snore, did not respond to a nudge from her foot, so she
went and slept elsewhere.
She woke at 3.15 am and heard no snoring. She went to check on him and
could not waken him. He was in the same position as when she had last
seen him. He was too heavy for her to roll him over.
An ambulance was called and she was told he was dead.
Autopsy
The relevant findings can be very briefly summarised. At autopsy, the only
significant findings were:
a heart weighing 510 g with thickening of the wall of the left ventricle
and dilatation of the chamber of the left ventricle;
50 per cent occlusion of the anterior descending branch of the left
coronary artery by atheroma.
Samples of blood taken for toxicology showed the presence of the
following drugs:
0.2 mg/1
Morphine
0.1 mg/1
Oxycodone
0.7 mg/1
Pethidine
Paracetamol
~5 mg/1
Naproxen
~2 mg/1
0.1 mg/1
Diazepam
0.2 mg/1
Nordiazepam
0.2 mg/1
Sertraline
The pathologist who performed the autopsy gave the cause of death as:
1. (the disease or condition directly leading to death) (a) Unascertained
2. (other conditions contributing to death but not to the condition causing
death)
Cardiomegaly, moderate coronary atherosclerosis.
The wife was concerned about this conclusion and the case went to inquest.
The pathologist persisted with the view that the drugs had no part to play in the
death because at the levels they were not sufficient to cause unconsciousness, let
alone death.
A second pathologist gave evidence that there was a confluence of a number of
events aggravating each other to produce the fatal outcome:
the presence of drugs interacting with each other to render him, in the
second pathologist's view, unconscious
the level of unconsciousness may have been associated with a reduced
respiratory drive
his posture, associated as it was with snoring, indicated a degree of
obstruction to breathing
his size, being as overweight as he was, particularly when lying on his
front would probably be associated with some reduction in the
diaphragmatic component of his breathing
his enlarged heart and moderate cardiomegaly.
The second pathologist viewed the course of events as follows. Any person
who is unconscious is at serious risk of death from respiratory obstruction. A
certain level of respiratory obstruction was present in any event as evidenced by
the snoring. Respiratory obstruction would have reduced the oxygen and allowed
the accumulation of carbon dioxide in the blood. His heart, being abnormal,
would have rendered him more susceptible to a fatal outcome from the effects of
respiratory obstruction. The lowered oxygen levels triggered a fatal disturbance
of heart rhythm.
The cause of death was formally given by the second pathologist as:
1 (a) Mixed drug toxicity causing unconsciousness in an obese man with cardiomegaly and moderate
coronary atherosclerosis lying on his front.
The second pathologist also offered the following caution:
The absolute essential in this cause of death is the unconsciousness. If it was found that the deceased was
not unconscious, but simply asleep, then the cause of death and the analysis I have made obviously
cannot be right.
Counsel for the doctors who had prescribed the drugs asked the second
pathologist for the grounds that were relied on to conclude that the deceased was
unconscious. The answer given was:
the wife's view that earlier in the day he had been clearly affected by
drugs
the very loud snoring which did not awaken him
the removal of the pillow and moving of the head by the wife which did
not wake him
the finding of him dead in the very same position
nothing to positively suggest that he was just asleep.
The second pathologist re-iterated, that while it was proper for a pathologist to
form a view about the circumstances in formulating the cause of death, it was
clearly open to the court to have a different view in which case it would have a
different conclusion about the cause of death.
Counsel was also concerned to understand the basis for the conclusion that the
mixed drugs could result in unconsciousness or even death. The second
pathologist pointed to experience in the form of a number of deaths – the
complete reports of which were exhibited – where mixtures of similar drugs at
similar levels had been concluded, by a variety of pathologists, to have resulted in
death. This, the second pathologist stated, was sufficient basis for the conclusion
that the drugs in Mr F's case were capable of causing unconsciousness, if not
death.
This case then, is not only an example of the cause of death being dependent
upon the interpretation of the circumstances, but also the subjectivity of whether
a particular finding at autopsy is capable of causing death.
In the event, the coroner, having heard other conflicting evidence from
anaesthetists and clinicians involved in pain management about the effects of the
drugs, made no conclusion about the relationship between the drugs and the
death.
Summary
What general rule, if any, can we formulate following all of this? In my view, if
there is operating at the time of death a disease or condition capable itself of
causing or accelerating death, and in the circumstances of the particular death, its
effects apparently exerted themselves, then the disease or condition should be
included as part of the cause of that person's death. (This formulation deals,
amongst other things, with the situation where it would be nonsense to include
coronary atherosclerosis in the cause of death of a man decapitated by a train
having been seen by the driver to place himself on the line in the path of an
oncoming train.) In addition, if a disease or condition (whether or not a
potentially fatal condition) aggravates or complicates another disease or
condition (whether or not a potentially fatal condition) such that death occurs
then both diseases or conditions should generally be included as part of the cause
of death.
This formulation has its weaknesses as it does nothing to help draw the line in
the areas of remoteness of cause. The example given above of the smoking-
related death and its causal connection to advertising and the parents' smoking
habits is a good one. Courts should, and will, have a view about the remoteness
of a particular cause.
Conclusions as to Manner of Death
For many, the cause of death is synonymous with the manner of death, for
example, murder, accident, suicide or natural death. A chapter purporting to deal
with the cause of death needs to canvas some of the issues in relation to manner
of death as well.
It will have been apparent in many of the cases above that conclusions as to
the cause of death often carry with them an implication as to the manner of
death; but not always. Making conclusions as to the manner of death is a
fundamental responsibility of medical examiners in the United States and of
many coroners' jurisdictions around the world, but not all.
Making these conclusions can be a bit like pushing square pegs into round
holes. So much so, that some jurisdictions have moved away from requiring such
conclusions. In Victoria, the coroner must find who the deceased was, the
medical cause of death and how the deceased died.5 The last requirement is met
in descriptive terms. For example: "The deceased, who was an intravenous drug
addict, unemployed and depressed, was found on the floor in the kitchen of the
house he was sharing with friends. Intravenous drug paraphernalia was found on
the kitchen table, recent injection marks were identified on his forearms at
autopsy and metabolites of heroin together with alcohol and a benzodiazepine
were found on toxicology. The cause of death was 'Mixed Drug Toxicity'." The
words "accident" or "suicide" are not used although on occasions reference will be
made to apparent intentions on the part of the deceased to take his/her own life.
This, of course, causes problems for those charged with compiling mortality
statistics!
The reverse is true in England where coroners are required to classify the
death into one of a number of categories:6 for example, "natural cause",
"industrial disease", "want of attention at birth", "dependence on drugs", "killed
himself (while the balance of his mind was disturbed)", "accident",
"misadventure", "murder", "manslaughter", "infanticide", "accident", "open verdict".
Doing so may not be straightforward as some recent work from the United States
has verified.
A study by Hazlick and Goodin7 in is interesting in demonstrating the high
level of disagreement amongst the "experts" in this area. Twenty-three succinct,
well described classical forensic pathology situations were presented to more
than 700 medical examiners/coroners (ie forensic pathologists) who were
members of the National Association of Medical Examiners, eliciting responses
from 198 of them. The manner of death inferred from the ICD Code that was
assigned by the (US) National Centre for Health Statistics matched the most
common response of participants in 18 (78 per cent) of the 23 scenarios. Table 1
shows the percentage agreement for the most popular conclusion (homicide,
suicide, accident, natural, undetermined, other/blank).
TABLE 1
Percentage of 198 forensic pathologists agreeing on the most popular manner of deaths in 23 scenarios
No. of scenarios
Percentage
41-50
51-60
61-70
71-80
81-90
91-100
In fewer than half the eases, admittedly chosen because they were at the
boundary of different manners of death, was there greater than 80 per cent
agreement. In other words, in only 11 out of 23 cases did more than 80 per cent of
198 United States forensic pathologists agree on the manner of death. There was
considerable diversity of opinion amongst the relevant experts as to the manner
of death in these examples. This points to different understandings even on the
same facts, of the criteria to establish particular manners of death. Such
differences commonly include:
how certain the pathologist should be to make a conclusion (eg the special
consequences of concluding suicide may be such as to mean some will
require a higher standard of proof than others); and
different understandings of intention (eg the reckless killing of another
may be a homicide whereas the reckless killing of oneself will generally
be considered an accident and not a suicide).
The differences amongst pathologists and between them and the health
statisticians about the manner of death shows how contentious assigning this
form of cause can be.
* Professor of Forensic Medicine at Monash University and Foundation Director of the Victorian Institute
of Forensic Medicine. Acknowledgment: Publishers of The Lancet for permission to reproduce much
of the author's paper "Deciding the Cause of Death after Necropsy" (1993) 341 Lancet 1458.
1 S Cordner, "Deciding the Cause of Death after Necropsy" (1993) 341 Lancet 1458.
2 S Cordner, B Linehan, M El Nageh, D Wells & H McKelvie, Ethical Practice in Laboratory Medicine and
Forensic Pathology, WHO Regional Publications, Eastern Mediterranean Series, WHO Regional
Office for the Eastern Mediterranean, Alexandria, Egypt, 1999, p38.
3 PM Nemetz, J Ludwig & LT Kurland, "Assessing the Autopsy" (1987) 128 American Journal of
Pathology 362; PA McKelvie & J Rode, "Autopsy Rate and a Clinicopathological Audit in an
Australian Metropolitan Hospital – Cause for Concern?" (1992) 156 Medical Journal of Australia 456;
GDH MacLaine, EB MacArthur & CR Heathcote, "A Comparison of Death Certificates and Autopsies
in the Australian Capital Territory" (1992) 156 Medical Journal of Australia 462.
4 See D Lanham, "Principles of Causation in Criminal Law", Chapter 10, above.
5 Coroners Act (Victoria) 1985, s19(1). See I Freckelton, "Causation in Coronial Law", Chapter 16, below.
6 RB Hill & RE Anderson, The Autopsy –Medical Practice and Public Policy, Butterworth, Boston, 1988,
pp68-90.
7 R Hazlick & J Goodin, "Mind Your Manners Part III Individual Scenario Results and Discussion of the
National Association of Medical Examiners Manner of Death Questionnaire, 1995" (1997) 18(3)
American Journal of Forensic Medicine and Pathology 228.