Part C:
Issues of Causal Responsibility, Agency
and Harm in Criminal Law
10 Principles of Causation in Criminal
Law
DAVID LANHAM*
Introduction
Questions of causation in the context of crimes involving personal injury can
present themselves across the whole spectrum of such offences, from the causing
of transitory pain to the infliction of death. Most of the major reported cases have
been decided in the context of homicide. The principles emerging from those
cases are, in general, and with appropriate allowance for the different level of
harm caused, applicable to crimes involving non-fatal injuries. From this point,
however, in order to keep the explanation reasonably simple the discussion will
focus on causing death.
In that context, causation resolves itself into two questions: first is there a
factual link between the defendant's conduct and the victim's death, secondly is
the link sufficiently substantial to make the defendant's conduct the cause of
death?1
In the main, the proving of the factual link raises questions of evidence rather
than theory. So in R v White,2 the defendant placed poison in his mother's drink.
She consumed the drink and died, but the medical evidence showed that she died
of a heart attack unconnected with the poison. As no factual link was made out
the defendant could not be found guilty of murder.
The factual link may be indirect. In Sirinjui Biagwei v R3 two natives J and S
cast spears into the victim. J threw four spears and then S threw his four. It was
not clear whose spear caused the death nor was it a case of aiding and abetting.
Each native was acting independently, but there was a native custom under
which natives who joined in a killing gained prestige. The court held that J was
guilty but S was not.
The result can be explained as follows. There was not enough evidence to
establish a factual link between S's action and the death. The victim may have
been dead by the time S threw his first spear. J however could be held guilty on
either of two hypotheses. If his spear caused the death there would be no
problem. If S's spear caused the death, J could be held liable since his action
induced S to act. The factual link was established.
It may be objected that even though there was a factual link, the link was too
weak to justify holding J guilty because S was an independent actor. This goes to
the strength rather than the existence of the link, a matter to be taken up below.
For the moment it seems that the native custom was regarded as strong enough
to overcome the objection that S's act was independent.
What I have called the factual link is sometimes described as the "but for"
requirement or "sine qua non test". According to this test, causation is not
established if the death would not have occurred but for the act of the defendant.
In many cases this way of describing the requirement will work well enough. In
R v White,4 the poisoning case, the mother would have died even if the defendant
had not poisoned her drink. It could not be said that she would not have died but
for the defendant's action.
But other cases which seem to cry out for liability would yield the wrong
result under a "but for" test. Suppose A and B independently place two grains of
poison each into V's drink, and that the fatal dose is two grains. V dies of the
poison. There is clearly a factual link between A's act and the death, but it would
be wrong to say that V would not have died but for the action of A. If A had done
nothing V would still have died. The same is true of B. The result of a "but for"
test would be that both would have to be acquitted even though each contributed
in a substantial way to the death. Such a result would be intolerable and its
avoidance justifies the wider factual link test. Professor J Andenaes suggests that
both would be liable under Norwegian criminal law5 and the same should be true
of Australian law. Both should also be liable where neither act is enough by itself
to cause death but in combination the two acts do. Suppose in the poison case the
fatal dose is 3 grains. A's 2 grains would not have killed nor would B's. But their
combined four grains would be enough.6
A more borderline case would be that where A gives 3 grains (the fatal dose)
and B gives 2. Andenaes notes a conflict of opinion in Norwegian law on this
point.7 There might be room for a distinction between cases where the whole of
the drink was consumed and those where something less was taken. But this
could lead to complicated questions of medical proof and it would seem better to
hold both guilty.
Once the "but for" requirement is abandoned other cases which might cause
difficulty can be more easily solved. Hart and Honoré8 adapting a problem set by
McLaughlin,9 pose a problem along these lines: V is entering a desert. A secretly
places poison10 in V's water keg, B steals the keg and V dies of thirst. The "but
for" test would lead to the acquittal of both A and B. But there is a clear factual
link between A's act and V's death, but no factual link between B's act and the
death. V has died because of the absence of drinkable water. It cannot matter
whether the death is due to poisoning or thirst.11 Suppose B had not intervened
but V had somehow discovered the water was poisoned. V might throw the
poison away, preferring the risk of death by thirst to the certainty of death by
poison. A could not complain that the death occurred in a manner different from
that contemplated. B's intervention makes no difference. There is no factual link
between B's act and V's death. B has unwittingly prolonged V's life. The
withdrawal of drinkable water by A remains the cause of V's death.
Where causation is a matter for the general (common) law the "but for" test
creates no difficulties because there is nothing to require the courts to apply it.
But where causation has been embodied in legislation there may be less room for
a sensible result. Section 153(2) of the Tasmanian Criminal Code for example
expressly adopts the "but for" test. It would do well to abandon it.
If the factual link is established, the next question is whether that link is
sufficiently strong to attribute the death to the defendant's action. Three matters
need to be considered: first the general formula, secondly special sub-rules and
thirdly the significance of intention, foresight and foreseeability.
General Formula
Australian law adopts the view that to found liability a cause must be a
substantial and operating cause. This was the test set out in the English decision
of R v Smith,12 where a person who had been stabbed by the defendant was
dropped by stretcher bearers and given poor medical treatment. The Court of
Criminal Appeal held that the defendant was guilty as his act was a substantial
and operating cause of the death. This test has been adopted by Australian state
full courts.13 The position taken by the High Court of Australia is more obscure.
A rather special aspect of the law of causation arose in Royall v R14 where the
problem was whether one who frightens another into killing herself accidentally
can be held to have caused the death. This question was the main focus of the
judgments but there were some, largely conflicting, views expressed about
causation more generally. It is virtually impossible to find a majority position.
Only McHugh J attempted an overall theory of causation, based upon
foreseeability,15 but this led him into dissent on the main question before the
court, and this approach was in effect rejected by the other judges. But not much
positive was put in its place. There is a majority appeal to common sense,16 but it
is clear that common sense provides no test at all. It is true that common sense or
sound judgment will need to be applied in assessing any matters of degree which
the legal tests present, but common sense will not provide those tests. We need
look no further than the main legal point at issue in the Royall case itself to see
that common sense can lead to either of two different rules. At its simplest the
question was: if the victim reacts unreasonably to the defendant's threats and in
doing so accidentally kills herself, has the defendant caused the death? Most of
the judges said no, but McHugh J said maybe. Both answers are consistent with
common sense.
Three judges referred to a significant contribution.17 Deane and Dawson JJ
appear to have regarded "significant" as meaning the same as "substantial", as
does McHugh J.18 There certainly seems no good reason to reject the learning
based on the word "substantial" and introduce doubts based on the slightly
different word "significant". The majority judgments on the reasonable reaction
question suggests no desire to widen the rules of causation through the adoption
of the word "significant". The result seems to be that the basic approach taken in
England and adopted by State courts in Australia remains.19
Do we need two words to capture the basic principle in causation? In R v
Malcherek,20 an English case involving the withdrawal of life support from
victims injured by the defendants and close to death, the Court of Appeal said
that the operating cause did not need to be substantial. As there was no doubt in
the case that the original injury was a substantial cause of death the question did
not arise for decision, but the comment looks wrong. There must be a point at
which a cause is still operating but is so insubstantial that it should not result in
liability. If either of the words is to be rejected it should be the word "operating",
but simply on the ground that it is superfluous. A cause cannot be substantial
unless it is operating. But that is clear from the further explanation of the formula
adopted in R v Smith.21 Speaking of the case where there is an original injury and
a second and more direct cause of the death, like poor medical treatment, the
court said that only if the second cause is so overwhelming as to make the
original wound part of the history can it be said that death does not flow from
the wound. This test seems to reflect the requirement of substance rather than
mere operational quality, and seems an equally appropriate test whether the word
"operating" appears in the formula or not.
The substantial cause test is flexible enough to cover most causation questions,
but there are recurring situations where some sort of additional rule is advisable
either to exemplify, qualify or supplement the basic test.
Special Rules
(i) Physical infirmity
Cases can occur where a fairly minor blow can cause death because the victim
suffers from an unusual physical condition like an egg-shell skull or haemophilia.
In such cases it might be argued that the pre-existing physical condition rather
than the blow is the substantial cause of death. The criminal law deflects this line
of reasoning by adopting a notion that defendants take their victims as they find
them. On the question of causation they cannot avoid liability on the ground that
their attack would not have killed a person within the normal range of health. So
in R v Hayward,22 a husband chased his wife, threatening violence. She was
suffering from a persistent thymus gland so that the combination of physical
exertion and fright was enough to kill her. Ridley J told the jury that the threats
were a sufficient cause of the death. The jury convicted the husband of
manslaughter. The Laws of Australia23 accept the general rule but suggest that it
applies only to the pre-existing condition of the intended victims and not to those
unintentionally harmed. The author relies upon Timbu Kolian v R,24 where a
husband aimed a blow of moderate but illegal chastisement at his wife in the
dark. She was carrying a baby in her arms and the blow hit the baby on the head
killing him. The husband was held not guilty of manslaughter, but the ground of
acquittal was that the mental or fault element of the crime was not made out, not
that the husband's act had not caused the death of the child.25
(ii) Victim’s reaction to threats
Another case where the defendant's physical contribution to the death might be
regarded as minimal is that where the defendant threatens the victim who reacts
in such a way as to cause her own death. There is no problem with the factual
link in these cases, but how is the requirement of substantial cause to be
satisfied? There are three main tests: substantial consequence, foreseeability and
reasonable response.
Under the substantial consequence test, apart from the question of degree,
nothing more would need to be shown than that the threat was the substantial
cause of the victim's killing herself. In R v Halliday,26 a husband made threats
against his wife's life and to escape him she got out by a window and injured
herself. The husband had made frequent threats of violence before but had not
used actual violence. The Court for Crown Cases Reserved held that he was liable
for her injuries. The court adopted a wide principle.
If a man creates in another man's mind an immediate sense of danger which causes ... such person to try
to escape and in doing so he injures himself the person who creates such a state of mind is responsible
for the injuries which result.
The strength of this case is diminished by the fact that the trial judge had
expressed the law in a way more favourable to the defendant. He did so by
requiring that the fear of the victim should be well grounded and the action of
the victim reasonable.27 It may be that the appellate court's wide statement needs
to be understood in the light of the facts which were consistent with the trial
judge's narrower approach to causation. Even so, the appellate judgment at face
value may show that there is no inflexible rule that the reaction must be a
reasonable one and founded on a reasonable belief.
The second approach, that of foreseeability, would lay down a narrower test of
causation, but would not necessarily demand that the victim's belief or response
be reasonable. This was the line taken by McHugh J in Royall v R.28 The facts
were unclear but one possibility was that the defendant had made threats against
the victim's life and that the latter had jumped out of a window to escape, killing
herself. The High Court of Australia upheld the defendant's conviction for
murder, but the judges differed on the test of causation. McHugh J favoured a
reasonable foreseeability test. On this basis a defendant could be held guilty of
causing the death even if the victim's fear was not reasonable or if the victim's
reaction was unreasonable. Reasonableness either of belief or action on the part
of the victim would be merely a factor in assessing reasonable foreseeability.
There are however difficulties in relying on reasonable foreseeability as the
dominant approach to questions of causation. These will be considered later, but
the possibility that unreasonable beliefs or actions may be foreseeable argues
against a universal rule that unreasonableness breaks the chain of causation.
The third approach takes just that line. This is the approach favoured by
modern English cases29 and by most of judges of the High Court of Australia in
Royall v R.30 While some of the majority judges recognised that foreseeability lay
behind at least some rules of causation,31 they preferred to adopt a rule which
made the reasonableness or unreasonableness of the victim's belief or action the
crucial test of whether the threat caused the death.
If unreasonable conduct on the part of the victim does break the chain of
causation in these cases, there is room for considering whether a distinction
should be made between unreasonable beliefs and unreasonable reaction.32 A
victim may have a reasonable fear of great harm but may select an unreasonable
method of escape. Even where there is only one escape route, it may be one that
leads inevitably to death so that the mode of escape is unreasonable. This
distinction could lead to a salutary narrowing of the requirement of
reasonableness but it would be better to drop it altogether as an automatic
requirement in establishing causation.
(iii) Reaction to injuries
If an unreasonable reaction to a threat breaks the chain of causation, what about
an unreasonable reaction to an actual injury? Cases before Royall v R33 reject any
hard and fast rule that unreasonable conduct by the victim breaks the chain. A
modern case is R v Blaue.34 The defendant stabbed the victim piercing her lung.
She was a Jehovah's Witness and refused to have a blood transfusion which was
necessary to save her life. The defendant argued that her refusal was
unreasonable and so broke the chain of causation. The Court held that attackers
must take their victims as they find them and so the defendant caused the death.
This reasoning may go too far, but the case supports a proposition that there is no
automatic rule that intervening unreasonable conduct by the victim will break
the chain of causation in this kind of case. Blaue's case was approved by the
Victorian Court of Criminal Appeal in R v Evans and Gardiner.35
At one level there is an inconsistency between the cases in this section and
those in the last. In both cases there is a factual link between the defendant's
action and the death, but the immediate cause of death is unreasonable conduct
on the part of the victim. This breaks the chain of causation in the case of threats,
but not in the case of injuries. The best solution would be to bring the threats
cases into line with the injuries ones so that unreasonable conduct would not
break the causal link, but the two lines of cases can be reconciled on the basis
that by itself a threat cannot (except where a person is literally frightened to
death) be the cause of death, whereas an injury of any seriousness may be. This
might explain a difference between the two situations.
(iv) Third party reaction to threats
The direct cause of death may be an act by a third party who reacts to a threat by
the defendant. In R v Pagett,36 the defendant shot at armed police and used the
victim as a shield. The police returned the fire, killing the victim. The defendant
was held guilty of causing the death. The court held that a reasonable act in self
defence or in the execution of a legal duty did not break the chain of causation.
What if the police officers had acted unreasonably, for example by using
excessive force or by unduly risking the victim's life where no one was in
immediate danger? The situation would then be analogous to that in Royall v R,
discussed in section (ii) above.
(v) Negligent intervening conduct by a third party
The typical case is negligent medical treatment, though any negligent action in
response to the original attack would raise the same principle. Until relatively
recently intervening negligence by a third party seems to have broken the chain
of causation, at least if the original injury was not itself life threatening. In the
17th century, Hale37 said that if the injury was not mortal and the victim dies of
the ill application of unwholesome medicine which causes the death the original
assailant is not guilty. This view was followed in the United States decision of
Bush v Commonwealth38 where a wound was treated by a doctor suffering from
scarlet fever. The victim died of this fever and the original assailant was held not
guilty. The court seems to have regarded the scarlet fever as a wholly
independent instrumentality, but that seems doubtful as it was carried by a
physician treating the wound. The case was rather one of negligent medical
treatment39 and so stands for the proposition that, in the case of non-mortal
injuries, such treatment breaks the chain of causation. The same principle seems
to have been applied as one of the grounds of decision in R v Jordan.40 The
defendant stabbed the victim, but after the wound had largely healed the victim
was given medical treatment to which he was intolerant and which the appeal
court said was palpably wrong. The court held in effect that the treatment broke
the chain of causation. Though on one view it was the abnormality of the
treatment which broke the chain of causation, the case must be seen in the
context of an original wound that had almost healed. On this latter basis, the
original wound had ceased to be a substantial cause of death so that the case
supports no general principle that abnormal treatment or negligent treatment
breaks the chain of causation.
This is the way R v Jordan has been treated by later English and Australian
cases which have held that medical negligence does not necessarily break the
chain of causation.
In England the turning point came in 1959 in the shape of R v Smith.41 The
defendant soldier stabbed the victim, another soldier, with a bayonet. The wound
might not have been fatal, but the victim was dropped while being carried to the
medical centre and at the centre he received inappropriate medical treatment.
The Courts-Martial Appeal Court refused to regard the intervening negligent
treatment as something breaking the chain of causation and held the defendant
liable on the basis that the stabbing was a substantial and operating cause of the
death. This approach was approved and the Jordan case was confined to cases of
insubstantial cause by the Jehovah's Witness case R v Blaue42 and by R v
Malcherek,43 a case which involved the withdrawal of a respirator when there
was no hope of recovery from the defendant's attack. Not surprisingly, the
withdrawal did not break the chain of causation.
The operating and substantial cause approach in R v Smith was adopted by the
Full Court of Victoria in R v Evans and Gardiner (No 2).44 Here the victim
received a bowel resection operation for a stab wound inflicted by the defendant.
The operation was initially successful but about eleven months later, the victim
suffered pain and vomiting. He received treatment but died from a stricture in the
bowel. There was evidence that this should have been diagnosed and could have
been rectified by operative treatment. Nonetheless the Full Court held that the
alleged negligent medical treatment did not break the chain of causation.
Though intervening medical negligence, or other negligent third party conduct
will not necessarily break the chain of causation, it will do so if it renders the
defendant's action a less than substantial cause. In R v Cheshire45 the Court of
Appeal said that it was wrong for the judge to tell the jury that only reckless
medical treatment would break the chain of causation. Negligent treatment
would do so if independent of the defendant's acts and so potent as to make the
contribution of those acts insignificant.
In Australia it is possible that a narrower view of causation will be held as a
result of the decision of the High Court in Royall v R.46 There the majority held
that an unreasonable reaction to a threat would break the chain of causation. If
this reasoning were extended to the intervening medical treatment context,
negligent treatment would break the chain. This would overturn cases like R v
Evans and Gardiner and restore R v Jordan to centre stage. That case however
has rightly had few champions and some limit to the Royall case is desirable.
Recognition that medical negligence may, where independent and potent, break
the chain of causation would be an appropriate way of limiting the effect of the
Royall case, while it stands.
The criminal codes of Queensland, Western Australia,48 Tasmania49 and the
Northern Territory50 contain variations on these themes, the main thrust of
which is to hold that the chain of causation is broken where the immediate cause
of death is improper medical treatment.51 This seems an unduly restrictive
approach to causation.
(vi) Suicide by the victim
If any reaction to the defendant's conduct is going to break the causal link, a
deliberate act of self destruction seems a prime candidate. But there is no blanket
rule that even a deliberate suicide will of necessity break the chain of causation.
In R v Hallett52 the Full Court of South Australia considered whether suicide by a
victim after a severe beating would break the chain of causation, but left the
matter unresolved, save to refer to United States cases discussed in Howard's
Criminal Law text.53
One of the American cases cited by Professor Howard does support the view
that suicide breaks the chain of causation. In State v Angelina54 the defendant
inflicted a serious wound which could have itself caused death, but the victim
committed suicide. The court held that if the suicide was the act of an
independent responsible agent, it broke the chain of causation, but that if the
victim was rendered irresponsible by the wound inflicted by the defendant, the
chain was not broken. The court equated a responsible act of suicide with
negligent medical treatment and with the independent act of deliberate killing on
the part of an intervening third person.55
This case is in line with the early 20th century thinking on intervening medical
negligence but is weakened by later developments which hold that medical
negligence does not automatically break the chain of causation. Even so, suicide
is a stronger basis for breaking the chain than negligence and there is some merit
in the principle laid down by the court. Much depends, however, on the meaning
of "independent" and "responsible".
The notion that a non responsible act of suicide will not break the causal link
was taken further in Stephenson v State.56 The defendant brutally raped the
victim and bit her all over her body. She poisoned herself. On the trial for murder
the defendant argued that the victim's suicide broke the chain of causation. At
the appeal court two judges would have held that the victim's suicide broke the
chain unless the victim was irresponsible in the sense of insane within the
meaning of the defence of insanity. But the majority took a wider view of non-
responsibility. The fact that the victim was distracted by pain and shame was
enough to remove her responsibility for the act of suicide and so render the
defendant liable for her death.
But even this may be too narrow a rule. A third American case focuses more
on the question of independence than on that of the responsible nature of the act
of suicide. In People v Lewis57 the defendant shot the victim who then cut his own
throat, hastening the death. It was unclear why the victim killed himself. It may
have been because of the pain from the gunshot wound, from remorse or from a
desire to shield the defendant who was the victim's brother in law. The Supreme
Court of California held that the defendant was guilty of murder, whichever of
the three reasons was the true reason for the suicide. The court seems to have
been persuaded by the fact that the original gun shot wound was mortal in the
sense that it would inevitably have led to death within the hour. It took the view
that if the wound had been merely painful and not mortal and if the victim knew
this, the suicide would have broken the chain.
What is noticeable about the Lewis case is that what is regarded as important
is not whether the suicide was a responsible act, but whether it was caused by the
wounding. This seems a better test than that in the other two American cases, but
the application of the principle may have gone too far on the facts of the case. If
there really was a reasonable doubt whether the victim killed himself out of
remorse, the defendant should have been acquitted of the full crime.58 The
remorse reason suggests that the victim killed himself because of his own earlier
blameworthy actions (the two men had quarrelled) rather than the defendant's
act of wounding. But the reference to remorse is brief in the extreme and the
point is not examined. It is possible that, despite mentioning remorse as a possible
motive, the court did not take the possibility at all seriously. On either of the
other (more plausible) possible motives, the causal potency of the wound on the
suicide seems substantial. On that basis the case is in line with most of the
Australian cases on causation. Certainly, it does not seek to erect a hurdle of
reasonableness. While the motive of pain might have made the self destruction a
reasonable act, the desire to shield the assailant from the law could hardly have
been regarded as reasonable. Yet neither motive would have led to a break in the
chain of causation.
(vii) Intervening deliberate act of killing by X
Perhaps the strongest case for recognising a break is that where the immediate
cause of death is a deliberate act of killing by a third party. In a United States
case, State v Scales,59 the defendant inflicted severe burns on the victim but the
immediate cause of death was a blow to the head by X, an unidentified third
party. It was assumed that the act of X was independent of the infliction of the
burns. The court held that the independent act of killing by X meant that the
defendant had not caused the death. The court said that where the intervening
act was independent, the original assailant could not be said to have killed the
victim without involving the absurdity of saying that the victim was killed twice.
This reasoning is unsatisfactory. It would apply equally to a case where the
second act of killing was dependent on, in the sense of a reaction to, the first
attack. We can ascribe two (among many) possible motives to killer X. One is that
X wanted the victim dead for X's own purpose and was not willing to entrust the
death to the burning. A sufficiently massive blow to the head might properly
break the chain of causation. The second is that X found the victim in an
apparently painful and hopeless condition and inflicted the blow to the head as
an act of mercy. There would then be no good reason to deny the liability of the
defendant.
A case from Papua New Guinea provides a more borderline example. As was
seen earlier, in Sirinjui Biagwei v R,60 the first defendant threw four spears at the
victim and then the second defendant did the same. The second defendant acted
in accordance with a native custom which accorded honour to those who joined
in a killing. That custom removed the quality of independence from the second
defendant's acts so that they did not break the chain of causation.
Another situation in which the original assailant should be held liable is that
where the original blow continues to be a substantial factual cause of death even
though the second blow is given by a fully independent third party with his or
her own reasons for wanting the victim dead. In People v Lewis61 the Supreme
Court of California said that in this situation both assailants could be guilty of
homicide, and this seems the right solution.
(viii) Independent intervening human actions which represent
the sole or overwhelming actual cause of death
Quite a mouthful, but there seems little doubt that this kind of intervening action
would break the chain of causation, whether or not the original injury was likely
of itself to result in death. The principle is clearly stated in Bush v
Commonwealth62 and State v Scales,63 cases referred to earlier, but neither the
application of the principle in Bush nor the reasoning behind it in Scates is
entirely satisfactory. The difficulty perhaps is not so much in stating the principle
as in applying it. Independence lies not in the fact that the intervening actor may
be criminally or civilly liable as the court in the Scates case seems to have
thought, but in the fact that the intervening act is not a reaction to the original
injury. It does not turn on the culpability or level of culpability of the intervening
actor, as an act can be independent in the sense used here, whether it is
deliberate, negligent or innocent, justified, excused or illegal.
Suppose in time of war or rebellion a fighter pilot aims a missile at what he
believes is the enemy's headquarters but hits what turns out to be a field hospital
killing dying patients and doctors. Whatever the legality of the pilot's act, it
would break the chain of causation in relation to any patient killed solely by the
missile. The killing would be in no way a reaction to the original injury. But were
a patient in the far end of the hospital to die partly of the original wound and
partly by some aggravation of that wound by shock from the missile, the chain of
causation would not necessarily be broken. It would not be broken if the original
wound was still a substantial cause of the death.
(ix) Intervening act of nature
Suppose the defendant's act leaves the victim vulnerable to the forces of nature
which are the immediate cause of the death. Here the law draws a distinction
between the ordinary course of nature and extraordinary events. So if the
defendant knocks the victim unconscious and leaves him on the sea shore and he
is drowned by the incoming tide, the defendant is liable, but if the victim is killed
by an earthquake on a tidal wave, the chain of causation is broken.64
(x) Intention, foresight and foreseeability
There are two extreme views on the relationship between causation and
intention, foresight and foreseeability. At one end of the spectrum is the notion
that causation is a matter of objective fact and that questions of intention,
foresight and foreseeability have nothing to do with this part of the case. This
was the position taken by the Full Court of South Australia in R v Hallett.65 At
the other extreme, foreseeability is a, if not the, central test of causation. This was
the approach taken by McHugh J in Royall v R66 and by Smith and Hogan's
Criminal Law.67 The current position seems to be that foreseeability is not
necessary for causation, but that intention, foresight or foreseeability may
sometimes establish causation where otherwise it would be lacking.
If we take a case where normally causation would not be made out, we can see
how intention might make a difference. Suppose the defendant knocks the victim
unconscious and the victim is killed by an earthquake. Hallett's case contemplates
that the defendant would not be guilty of causing the death. This would be so
whether the defendant intended to kill the victim by the attack or was merely
grossly negligent. But suppose the defendant knows that an earthquake is
imminent and leaves the victim in a place where he or she hopes the earthquake
will cause death. The defendant should be held liable. Though R v Hallett seems
to deny liability even where this kind of intention is present, the High Court of
Australia in Royall v R68 would impose liability. Mason CJ said that state of mind
could be relevant to causation for example where the defendant intended the
injury should result in the way in which it did.69 Brennan J applied a similar
principle to the case where the victim reacts unreasonably to the defendant's
threat. If the defendant intended that the threat should cause the reaction,
causation is made out.70
This principle extends to foresight.71 Even if the defendant does not want the
victim to die and is not virtually certain that she will, he may be liable if he
foresees that death is likely to (or may as a real possibility) occur in the way that
it does. The degree of probability has not yet been worked out, but real, as
opposed to fanciful possibility should be enough to establish causation.
Where does that leave foreseeability? We saw earlier that in Royall v R only
McHugh J was prepared to regard foreseeability as the appropriate criterion of
causation to ask the jury to apply. The other judges rejected that approach.
Implicit in that rejection are two consequences. First, that one can be held to
cause death even if the manner of death is not reasonably foreseeable. The
stabbing of a Jehovah's Witness who refuses a biood transfusion seems to fall into
that category. Secondly, it is not generally appropriate to ask the jury to consider
the foreseeability of the manner of death in deciding matters of causation.
Leaving an unconscious person on the sea shore where she is drowned by the
incoming tide is an example. It would be profitless to clutter up the issue with the
question whether a reasonable person would foresee that the tide might come in
and drown the victim. Better to have a fully objective rule which recognises the
effect of the normal course of nature. So is there any room at all for
foreseeability? There is one function it could perform. Like intention and
foresight, it might be allowed to widen the notion of causation to cases it would
not normally reach. But in order to play this part it would have to be something
different from a reasonable person style of foreseeability. In order to justify a
widening of the ordinary rules of causation, the foreseeability would have to be
personal to the particular defendant. The point can be illustrated by reference to
the reaction to threat kind of homicide. The rule that the reaction must be
reasonable can be reframed as a rule that the reaction must be reasonably
foreseeable together with a sub-rule that unreasonable reactions are not
reasonably foreseeable. This last proposition could be restated in terms that a
reasonable person would not foresee a real possibility that the victim would react
in an unreasonable fashion. (It could not plausibly be stated that a reasonable
person could foresee no possibility whatever that the victim would act
unreasonably.) This way of expressing the law would simply be a clumsier, more
convoluted and more confusing way of arriving at the same position as the more
direct rule that an unreasonable reaction breaks the chain of causation. So if
foreseeability has any useful part to play it must be what this defendant could
reasonably be expected to foresee. So if there is evidence to show that this
defendant should, say by reason of past experience, have realised that the victim
would act in an unreasonable way, that should be enough to prevent the break in
the chain of causation.
Causation and the Model Criminal Code
The Commonwealth, States and Territories, through the Standing Committee of
Attorneys-General, are working on a Model Criminal Code intended for adoption
by all Australian jurisdictions. Clause 5.1.3 of the Model Criminal Code provides
that a person's conduct causes death or harm if it substantially contributes to the
death or harm. This is designed to codify Australian common law's preference for
substantial cause over any test based on foreseeability.72 It also seems designed to
overrule Royall v R73 on the point that an unreasonable reaction by a frightened
victim would break the chain of causation.74 The Committee did not consider the
question whether intention, foresight or foreseeability might provide a basis for
causation where objectively causation would not be made out, as in the predicted
earthquake case. The formulation in clause 5.1.3 seems flexible enough to cater
for such cases.
* Professorial Fellow at the Faculty of Law, the University of Melbourne.
1 A person's act may be a cause of death even if it is justified, as in a case of self defence – see Keown v
Khan [1999] 1 VR 69. Problems such as the administration of pain-killers which may shorten life are
also better dealt with under a theory of defences than by overloading the rules of causation: see D
Lanham, "Euthanasia, Painkilling, Murder and Manslaughter" (1994) 1 J of Law and Medicine 146.
2 [1910] 2KB 124.
3 (1962) 36 ALR 9 (High Court) and (1962) 1967-68 PNGLR 209 (retrial).
4 [1910] 2 KB 124, above.
5 The General Part of the Criminal Law of Norway, Fred B Rothman, South Hackensack NJ, 1965, at p118.
6 Andenaes, op cit, n5, at p121.
7 Ibid.
8 Causation in the Law, 2nd edn, 1985, at p239.
9 JA McLaughlin, "Proximate Cause" (1925-6) 39 Harvard Law Review 149 at p155.
10 To avoid ambiguity we need to assume that the poison would kill instantaneously so that the poisoned
water would not postpone death by overcoming thirst for a short while: see J Stapleton, "Perspectives
on Causation" in J Horder (ed), Oxford Essays in Jurisprudence, 4th Series, Oxford Uni Press, Oxford,
2000, at p84.
11 M Hale, 1 PC 617.
12 [1959] 2 QB 36.
13 Eg R v Hallett [1969] SASR 141; R v Evans and Gardiner (No 2) [1976] VR 523.
14 (1991) 172 CLR 378.
15 At p449.
16 Mason CJ at p387, Dean and Dawson JJ at pp411-12; Toohey and Gaudron JJ at p423.
17 Brennan J at p298; Deane and Dawson JJ at p411.
18 At p449.
19 The substantial cause test seems to have been approved by the High Court of Australia in Osland v R
(1998) 73 ALJR 173 but there the defendant was also acting in concert.
20 [1981] 2 All ER 422 at 428.
21 [1959] 2 QB 193 at 198.
22 (1908) 1 Cox CC 692. See also Mamote Kulang v R (1964) 111 CLR 62 (Papua New Guinea Code).
23 Criminal Law, Homicide, para 2[17].
24 (1968) 119 CLR 47.
25 This is also the case of the majority judgment of the High Court of Australia in R v Van Den Bemd
(1994) 179 CLR 137. See also J Blackwood, "Humpty Dumpty Was Pushed Off the Wall ..." (1996) 15
Univ of Tasmania LR 306.
26 (1889) 61 LT 701.
27 At p702.
28 (1991) 172 CLR 378 at p450. Contrast Brennan J who seems to have equated reasonable response with
foreseeability (at p394).
29 Eg DPP v Daley (1979) 69 Cr App R 39; R v Williams and Davis (1992) 95 Cr App R 1; R v Mackie (1973)
57 Cr App R 453; R v Marjoram, The Times, 3 December 1999.
30 (1991) 172 CLR 378.
31 Eg Mason CJ at 390; Deane and Dawson JJ at 412; Toohey and Gaudron JJ at 425.
32 A point left open by Mason CJ at 339.
33 (1991) 172 CLR 378.
34 [1975] 1 WLR 1411. See also R v Wall (1802) 28 State Tr 51; R v Holland (1841) 2 Mood and R 351.
35 [1976] VR 523 at 527. See also R v Bingapore (1975) 11 SASR 469.
36 (1983) 76 Cr App R 279.
37 1 Pleas of the Crown 428.
38 78 Ky 268 (1880).
39 See p271.
40 (1956) 40 Cr App R 152.
41 [1959] 2 QB 35.
42 [1975] 1 WLR 1411.
43 [1981] 1 WLR 690. For a similar case under the Queensland Criminal Code, see R v Kinash [1982] Qd R
648.
44 [1976] VR 523.
45 (1991) 93 Cr App R 251. See also R v McKechnie (1992) 94 Cr App R 51.
46 (1991) 172 CLR 378.
47 Criminal Code (Qd) s298.
48 Criminal Code (WA) s275.
49 Criminal Code (Tas) sl54(b).
50 Criminal Code (NT) s160.
51 Treatment includes a medical decision not to give treatment: R v Cook (1979) 2 A Crim R 151.
52 [1969] SASR 141.
53 C Howard, Australian Criminal Law, Law Book Co, Melbourne, Sydney, 1965, pp32-3.
54 80 SE 141 (1913).
55 At 142-3.
56 179 NE 633 (1933).
57 57 P 470 (1899). See also US v Hamilton, 182 FS 548 (1960).
58 There is some support for this view in R v Dear [1996] Crim L R 595.
59 50 NC 409 (1858).
60 (1962) 36 ALJR 9 and [1967-68] PNGLR 209.
61 57 P 470 at 473 (1899).
62 78 Ky 268 (1880).
63 50 NC 409 (1858).
64 R v Hallett [1969] SASR 141 at 150.
65 [1969] SASR 141.
66 (1991) 172 CLR 378 at 451. See also S Yeo, "An Australian Evaluation of Causation in Fright Cases"
(1943) J of Criminal Law 390.
67 (9th edn, 1999) at pp 339-44.
68 (1991) 172 CLR 378.
69 At 390. See also R v Michael (1840) 9 C and P 356.
70 (1991) 172 CLR 378 at 400.
71 R v Jemielita (1996) 81 A Crim R 409.
72 Model Criminal Code Officers Committee, Fatal Offences Against the Person, Discussion Paper, 1998, at
pp25-31.
73 (1991) 172 CLR 378.
74 Note 72, at pp27-31.