9 Causality and Spinal Pain: The Problem
of Back Pain
DENNIS SMITH*
Introduction
Recently, there has been a plain word approach in medicine to public and clinical
debate on common medical problems. Stroke, and low back pain are two
examples in these areas of concern. The term, "low back pain" is now used to
characterise lower spinal pain, and its variety of syndromes.
This chapter will limit itself to those features of low back pain related to
morphological changes in the joints and discs of the lumbar spine. It will not
consider those serious causes of back pain which are inflammatory or malignant
in nature. Nor will it discuss back pain referred from other organs. All of these
serious causes of back pain are relatively easy to distinguish from the commonest
types of low back pain, which, it is assumed, arise from the ligaments, joints and
discogenic structures making up the lumbar spine.
Clinical Epidemiology
The clinical epidemiological approach to medical management pioneered by
Sackville, Haynes and Tuckwell1 at McMaster University, Hamilton, Canada, is
largely responsible for many recent conceptual changes in the evolution of back
pain diagnosis and management during the two last decades. Their approach to
clinical diagnosis is worth highlighting. They recognise that sickness has three
elements:
1. The disease, or target disorder, the objective of the diagnostic process;
2. The illness, or cluster of symptoms and signs exhibited by the patient
and elucidated by the doctor;
3. The predicament, or the social, psychologic, and economic context in
which the patient is situated.
In most patients with acute back pain, the target disorder is difficult, if not
impossible, to define with clarity in exact pathological terms. The illness is also
vague and often extremely non-specific.
The predicament is that the patient is in pain, and often finds it difficult to
work. This predicament is added to by the wide variety of often conflicting
advice to which the patient may have been subjected.
Morphology
There are few conditions so common and poorly understood as persistent or
repetitive low back pain. This type of back pain is ubiquitous. The reason for it
may well be related to human evolution.
In anthropological terms man is a large ape. However, we differ from our
closest cousins, the Orang-Utan, the Gorilla, and the Chimpanzee, in that we
have, in recent developmental terms, adopted an upright posture, which has freed
our upper limbs for skilled manipulation, throwing, and uniquely human
activities, such as art and craft. We also utilise our extremely well developed
binocular vision as a result of our stable neck and head posture, particularly
when running. All of this comes at a cost.
The vertebrate spine is not, in evolutionary terms, a weight-bearing organ. It
originated in reptiles and fish. Most other mammals are like cats and dogs, in that
they have a horizontal back which is flexible, strong in construction in order to
contain the essentially delicate spinal cord, and equipped with muscles and
spinous processes which are both protective and mechanically designed to
facilitate energy transfer between the fore and hind limbs when walking or
running. The vertebrate spine also enables safe and efficient rapid changes of
direction and movement when running or hunting.
The upright human posture is probably developmentally less than a million
years old. Cro-Magnon man, our immediate ancestor, may be less than 40,000
years old, and is indistinguishable from Homo Sapiens.
A direct result of this recent evolutionary adaptation is that the vertebral discs
of the spine, particularly the lower (lumbar) spine, degenerate in early adult life.
This is almost certainly directly related to the severe transmitted vertical weight-
bearing pressures to which these structures are inevitably exposed. Lifting,
carrying, jumping and running, all subject these structures to compression and
shearing forces of up to 500 kilograms. This results in mechanical damage to the
external part of the disc, and subsequently to partial extrusion of the nucleus
pulposus of the disc through tears in the annulus fibrosus. These changes have
been known for at least 80 years.
Schmorl in Germany first described them, in the 1920s.2 He had access to
spines removed at post mortem following fatal accidents, and was able to
accumulate data on many hundreds of spines across a wide range of ages and
conditions. Biddle,3 an anatomist from England, was given access to this material
in 1930 and, in an elegant and careful series of histological microscopic and
macroscopic studies, was able to demonstrate the degenerative process in
considerable detail.
These were published in the first report of the newly created Medical Research
Council of England, demonstrating that this process of disc degeneration was
eventually almost universal and was related to the age of the individual, coming
to a maximum prevalence of some 80 per cent, in those specimens studied,
between the ages of 30 and 40.
The changes consist of extrusions of the central nucleus pulposus of the lumbar
disc through the annulus fibrosus, which itself shows tearing and rupture of its
intertwined collagenous fibres. This process is accompanied by considerable local
infiltration of cells such as lymphocytes and macrophages. This is part of the
healing or repair process, but does not lead to a restoration of the premorbid
situation. Hence the term "degeneration". This implies healing with scar tissue
and loss of function, and can be looked upon as a specific part of the ageing
process.
This imperfect repair process leads to a resolution of these changes such that
the degenerative process is complete by the 6th and 7th decade By this stage, the
liquid centre ("nucleus pulposus") in most of the specimens of this age, has broken
down and migrated through the degenerative fibres of the annulus fibrosus of the
disc, the result being that the functionally well designed lumbar disc becomes a
flattened fibrous remnant, with loss of movement and elasticity. A consequence is
secondary osteoarthritic changes in the facet joints of the spine. These are often,
but by no means always, the cause of symptoms such as stiffness, local pain, and
associated muscle spasm.
An equally important, but much later study by Hult4 in Sweden in the 1950s,
was a retrospective incidence analysis of a large population. This important study
related the first severe attack of back pain to the age of the patient. His findings
included data showing that the initial symptoms of acute back pain had an age
distribution essentially the same as in Biddle's study carried out some 25 years
earlier.
From these two well-designed studies, it would be reasonable to hypothesise
that acute incidents of back pain are therefore probably closely related to the
degenerative changes now known to occur in the spine in adult human life. This
conclusion is now generally accepted. What is still not clear is the exact
immediate cause of the acute symptoms in the individual patient.
Hadler, in his monograph, Medical Management of the Regional
Musculoskeletal Diseases,5 elaborates on the ubiquity of low back pain as a
problem. He does this in an important section entitled: "The Interface between
the Clinical Concept of Low Back Pain, and the Workers Compensation and
Social Security Disability Insurance Programs." He points out that it is
"unparalleled in its morbidity". We know that in the western world, for which
good data are available, 70 per cent of the population suffer from acute disabling
back pain at some time in their lives, and 10 per cent in the previous two years.
Clearly, according to Hadler, the problem of the relationship of pain to injury is
complex. The public perception of acute back pain is in general that it is caused
by injury. This simplistic view is defendable up to a point, in that an incident of
bending, or picking up, or lifting, often has a strong temporal relationship to the
acute episode. The reality is that the well-known proverb, "It's the last straw that
breaks the camel's back", is somewhat closer to the truth: This is, that the lower
back is prone to acute episodes of pain and disability, often triggered by minor
incidents, such as bending down to pick up an envelope. It is also prone to acute
episodes related to lifting heavy objects, or repetitive lifting, or unexpected
additional mechanical stress during a lift. This spectrum of "causes" is of
considerable importance in the work environment because of the fact that most
acute back pain incidents occur at work, and many of them are disabling, and
some of them are prolonged. It is also important to be aware that the precise
clinical and pathological nature, in structural anatomical terms, of these acute
attacks is still uncertain.
Taken together, these observations and the lack of precision in the diagnosis,
mean that back pain in the work environment is a major social, economic and
productivity concern. It is also a growing concern, or was up until the last year or
so in most industrial countries or environments.
The epidemiology of back pain in industry has been well recorded in Australia,
the United States and in Western Europe. Since the end of the 1950s, the point
prevalence (numbers at any one time) of back pain resulting in more than a
week's time off work has increased from 3 per cent of the work force to 20 per
cent of the work force. This is in spite of the recorded incidence of acute back
pain being fairly stable. It is also certainly true that the nature of much industrial
work has also changed, and may now be less arduous and better structured in
ergonomic terms. Despite this, time off work with back pain disability has
become more common.
The explanation for these alarming statistics is complex. It is almost certainly
related to changes in the management of back pain, including its perception as a
disability with particular consequences.
Disability and Back Pain
Disability is an essential concept in this area of concern, and has been well
defined in the WHO publication, The International Classification of Impairments
Disabilities and Handicaps,6 as in the context of health experience, any restriction
or lack (resulting from an impairment) of ability to perform an activity in the
manner or within the range considered normal for a human being. Disability is
characterised by excesses, or deficiencies of customarily expected activity,
performance and behaviour. It may be temporary or permanent, reversible or
irreversible, and progressive or regressive.
Disabilities may arise as a direct consequence of impairment, or may be a
psychological or learnt response to a physical sensory or other impairment.
Disability is the objective behaviour at the level of the person in response to
impairment, and is concerned with abilities in the form of composite activities
and behaviours, generally accepted as being essential components of everyday
life. This includes work disabilities.
It is also important to consider the relationship of disability to the interface
between disease and illness. A common variety of illness behaviour is related to
the "sick role". This is an adaptive, or learnt response to being acutely ill, well
described and defined by Parsons.7 Essentially, it is an abrogation of
responsibility in return for being looked after when ill. The implied contract
means that the ill patient is compliant and passive, doing as he or she is told. This
is a reasonable form of behaviour when acutely ill, as with, for example,
influenza or acute appendicitis. It is short term and socially sophisticated.
Acute back pain is rarely accompanied by a feeling of illness. The pain may be
severe, but is more in the nature of a mechanical problem than an acute
debilitating illness. If it is managed by the forced or voluntary adoption of the
sick role, then it leads to disability, in association with deconditioning. It is only
20 years ago that acute back pain was regularly managed by confinement to bed
for between a week and 10 days initially, and by the accompanying use of
tranquillisers such as diazepam in doses of up to 20 or 30 mgms a day. It is now
clear that this form of management leads to significant disability.
This is not to say that it is never appropriate. It may be of value in gross
degrees of disc prolapse in which the contents of the spinal canal are
compromised, but this is rare in the extreme – perhaps one in a thousand cases of
back pain, perhaps less. Unfortunately, variants on this form of management are
still common, and the lay view is also still somewhat in favour of rest as the
primary approach to acute back pain.
Management
Inappropriate management itself may well cause and certainly can prolong
disability in association with the majority of patients with persistent back pain.
There is, as yet, little uniformity in the management of patients with acute back
pain, but there is now consensus in the medical profession. An excellent review
article: "Low Back Pain" by Andrew Frank8 was published in the 1993 British
Medical Journal, and is still difficult to improve on. His description of differing
types of management concludes that active mobility exercises and fitness training
are associated with better recovery. Hadler's9 approach is essentially the same,
and Waddell's10 recent approach to management also emphasises the value of
simple exercises such as walking regularly and swimming in a warm pool. To this
I have recently advised that a snorkel and mask are useful when swimming,
because their use helps the patient to avoid twisting, or hyper-extending the back,
both often painful activities during acute episodes. The logic of this active
management approach is related to the limited blood supply to the lumbar disc. It
may well be that its normal nutrition is more related to the alternate compression
and relaxation, with dynamic fluid interchange, which occurs during walking,
sitting and standing, rather than to its haemodynamics.11
Historically, the management of back pain has always been a matter of
energetic debate. Mixter and Barr's 1934 paper12 describing the prolapsed
intervertebral disc was sufficiently convincing at the time to result in a preferred
surgical approach to be fashionable for decades. Not until Barr's excellent
retrospective studies in the 1960s13 did it become clear that surgery is only
strongly indicated in those patients with major neurological problems – less than
5 per cent of patients. There is, even now, no convincing evidence that spinal
fusion is effective in relieving symptoms and disability in more than a very small
minority of patients.
The preferred management, based upon the studies by Waddell, Frank, and
Hadler is that a conservative, informed and optimistic approach is appropriate.
Bed rest for more than a day is of no value. In practice, prolonged bed rest causes
physical deconditioning and increases disability.
The Problem of Pain
The most difficult to manage problems in this field of practice are without doubt
the group of chronic back pain sufferers whose symptoms have been present for
more than a year. There are a number of characteristics, which define the group.
In my experience, these are the patients who are referred to multidisciplinary
pain clinics with non-cancer pain. They are usually unable to work. Most
previous modes of management have either made them worse or were of no help.
Analgesics, including opiates are generally of little help. They are usually able to
carry out activities of daily living (dressing, feeding, toilet care) without any
major problems, but work is not possible, or travelling to work is disabling. Their
lives are totally dominated by the recalcitrant pain. They talk and think of little
else. They often have a history of multiple surgical interventions, none of which
have helped. They often have an unsettled compensation problem. They are
frequently clinically depressed. A full psychological assessment defines certain
persistent behavioural traits.14
Physical examination is uncomfortable, and may demonstrate inconsistencies,
related to position. The process of undressing, and then getting onto the
examination couch, may be slow and distressing. It usually is not painful, but
may appear to be grossly abnormal, and sometimes bizarre, if the patient is
carefully instructed not to move beyond the point of discomfort. Palpation of the
region in which the pain is found is often described as burning or knife like. A
few of these patients are exaggerating their symptoms consciously, but an equal
or greater number are not. They are often depressed; some of them have post
traumatic stress disorder ("PTSD"). Many may have been inappropriately
managed at an earlier stage. This is at times related to their own insistence on
continuing with therapies of little value or benefit. Many of them have what
Pilowsky15 has defined as "abnormal illness behaviour". This is a learnt
phenomenon, and can be characterised as acquired disability, usually and
specifically including an inability to carry out work-related activities.16
Effective management depends upon a sympathetic approach by a
multidisciplinary team, which needs to include a psychiatrist, a psychologist, a
physiotherapist, a social worker, a pain consultant, and a specialist in vocational
rehabilitation. The assessment may take a number of days. All members of the
team are specifically and professionally trained in the management and
assessment of chronic pain.
The model I have described is based upon the University of Washington
Multidisciplinary Pain Centre, which was set up by John Bonica and Wilbert
Fordyce in 1960. Similar centres are now functioning in the United Kingdom,
Canada and Australia, using the same essentially pluralistic model, and a
cognitive behavioural approach to management, based upon an informed
contract between the centre and the client. Even so, of those patients referred to
clinics of this nature, only about 15 per cent are assessed as being likely to
improve with the program, which is both behavioural, that is to say, designed to
alter illness behaviour and physical, that is to say designed to produce realisable
improvements in both perceived strength and fitness.16 The pain clinic needs
effective linkage with competent vocational selection and rehabilitation services.
It also often needs to be in enlightened and informed touch with the clients
employer, if this is agreed by the client, and if they still have one. It is necessarily
an expensive process, but for this extremely difficult group, is the only form of
management demonstrated to be effective in both the short and long term, but
only for the small percentage of those referred and accepted as suitable for the
programs.
A New Zealand study by Feyer and her co-workers in Dunedin and Sydney
Australia has recently looked at risk factors related to the development of low
back pain in health care workers. They found that a previous history of back pain
predicted further attacks, but pre-existing psychological distress, as measured by
the General Health Questionnaire,17 was the only other factor which preceded
new attacks of lower back pain. This finding suggests that the management of the
onset of occupational low back pain might be improved by the management of
psychological stress in those with a previous history of low back pain.
Osteoarthritis of the Facet Joints, Goniometry and
Impairments
Compared to the previous problem of so-called discogenic back pain,
osteoarthritis of the facet joints is conceptually a relatively simple condition. It is
both straightforward to diagnose, and clear in its symptomatology. It is usually
related to, and a consequence of prolonged hard physical work. There are, as
always in medicine, exceptions to this statement. Infrequently, it can be related to
specific inflammatory diseases such as variants of rheumatoid arthritis, or it may
eventually develop following childhood or adolescent trauma or illness.
Miners, professional athletes, labourers and farmers are characteristically
subject to the condition which is usually of gradual onset, associated with pain
and stiffness, and localised to the affected segment of the spine. The physical and
radiological signs are eventually "hard". This means objective and persistent. It is
usually possible to quantify the level of impairment in terms of loss of movement
and increased pain and weakness, and for this the American Guides are a useful
tool.
It is useful to have regard to the fourth edition of the American Medical
Association Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment.18 The purpose of
these Guides is to render objective the assessment of permanent impairment.
They use an odd definition of impairment, which, while exclusively related to
loss at the level of the organ, as in the ICIDH I19 is defined in terms of how they
affect the patient's daily activities, including work, that is to say, implied
disability. Not everyone's daily activities and work are the same, so there is a
conceptual problem with the scoring, which would disadvantage the concert
pianist as compared to the professional footballer in the case of loss of finger
movements in the dominant hand. This example is only one, and exposes a
fundamental weakness of the Guides.
However, if the scores are looked upon as impairment scores only, then they
are both useful, generally repeatable and thus reliable. They are an expanded and
comprehensive system of quantifying what used to be called "maims". According
to the Oxford English Dictionary this archaic word meant the loss of a limb or its
use. The term "maims" has been used in law to indicate a specific loss of function.
In low back pain they have value in the quantification of the loss associated with
loss of spinal joint range, in those with facet joint and discogenic osteoarthritis.
They can be taken in conjunction with the 1937 Schöber test,20 which is reliable
and often used as a single measure. Schöber found that a simple measurement,
using a ribbon tape measure, of forward flexion from a fixed skin mark at the
level of the sacrum, defined osteoarthritic stiffness in the back with excellent
reliability and simplicity. The normal range is from 10-15 cms. Anything less than
12 cm is deemed to be pathological.
Even so, it is important to be aware that findings of restricted movements in
the lumbar spine relate very little to a history of low back pain. Goniometry, or
measurement of restriction of movement, as mandated under the second edition
of the American Medical Association Guides to Permanent Impairment, is
appealing, because of its objectivity in terms of mensuration, but its relationship
to impairment is arguable, and it certainly has little to do with disability. There
have been many critiques of this aspect of medical measurement.21 For instance,
in spite of the seductiveness of accurate measurement of movement, mobility
variations occur significantly from day to day and year to year, without having
any value other than to quantify normal variations, rather than function. They
are useful in watching progress in individual patients, and may be of value in
monitoring fitness and mobility training.
Summary
The cause of low back pain is multifactorial, and relates to morphology,
psychology, behaviour and culture. The relationship to trauma is often temporally
convincing as a cause of the subsequent pain and disability. In the individual
case, without a history of previous back pain, and in which the strain on the back
is clearly extreme, then cause is likely to be perceived as being consequential to
the incident. The minor incident, followed by a prolonged period of disabling
pain and limited function is a different matter, and cause might be attributed to
fortuitous chance. If the subsequent pain is aggravated by work, then the
pendulum swings back towards compensability. Modern management would
encourage return to slightly modified work as being the best form of therapy. It
may well be that with the increased interest in maintenance of fitness, as a way
of life, that we will now begin to see a different attitude to back pain in both the
public and occupational domains. It will always be a common problem, but it is
now clearly less threatening to health and fitness with the right approach to
diagnosis and care. The concept of use it or lose it contains more than a grain of
truth.
* Former Foundation Professor of Rehabilitation Medicine at Flinders University, South Australia, and a
consultant at the Griffith Rehabilitation Hospital in South Australia.
1 J Biddle, Lumbar Disc Pathology, Medical Report Council Special Report No 1, HMSO, London, 1930.
2 G Schmorl & H Junghanns, The Human Spine In Health And Disease, Grune & Stratton, New York,
1971.
3 See Biddle, 1930, op cit, n1.
4 L Hult, "The Munkfors Investigation" (1954) Acta Orthop Scand (Supp 16) 1.
5 NM Hadler, Medical Management of the Regional Musculoskeletal Disorders, Grune & Stratton,
Orlando, Florida, 1984.
6 International Classification of Impairments, Disabilities and Handicaps, World Health Organisation,
Geneva, 1980.
7 T Parsons, The Sick Role: The Social System, The Free Press, Glencoe, Illinois, 1951.
8 A Frank, "Low Back Pain: Regular Review" (1993) 306 British Medical Journal 901.
9 Hadler, op cit, n5, pp30-1.
10 G Waddell, G Feder, A McIntosh, L Lewis & A Hutchinson, Low Back Pain Evidence Review, London
Royal College of General Practitioners, 1996.
11 Ibid.
12 WJ Mixter & JS Barr, "Rupture of the Intervertebral Disc with Involvement of the Spinal Canal" (1934)
211 New England Journal of Medicine 210.
13 JS Barr et al, "Evaluation of End Results in Treatment of Ruptured Lumbar Disc" (1967) 125 Surgery,
Gynaecology and Obstetrics 250.
14 GA Waddell, "A New Clinical Model for the Treatment of Low Back Pain" (1987) 12 Spine 632.
15 I Pilowsky & N Spence, Manual for the Illness Behaviour Questionnaire, University of Adelaide, 1981.
16 JD Loeser & J Egan Kelly, Managing the Chronic Pain Patient, Raven Press, New York, 1989.
17 DP Goldberg, The Detection of Psychiatric Illness, by Questionnaire, Oxford University Press, London,
1972.
18 American Medical Association, Guides to Permanent Impairment, 4th edn, AMA, Chicago, 1993.
19 International Classification of Impairments, Disabilities and Handicaps, WHO, Geneva, 1980.
20 P Schöber, "The Lumbar Vertebral Column and Backache" (1937) 84 Munchener Medizinische
Wochenschrift, Munich 336.
21 For instance, see D Smith, "Measurement of Joint Movement: An Overview" (1982) 8(3) Clinics in
Rheumatic Diseases 523.