16 Causation in Coronial Law
IAN FRECKELTON*
Introduction
The concept of causation is fundamental to the coronial function. In fact, society's
need to determine the reasons lying behind unexpected, suspicious and violent
deaths continues to this day as a principal reason for coroners having the role of
conducting formal inquests. Coroners in England, Canada, Australia and New
Zealand have as key parts of their role to determine the identity of persons who
have died in prescribed circumstances, to make findings about how deaths have
occurred and to rule upon what constituted the cause or causes of deaths. In some
jurisdictions, the obligation to decide formally whether a person contributed to
the cause of death is stipulated; in others it is regarded as subsidiary to other
findings. In some jurisdictions, the coroner has additional but cognate
responsibilities – to determine the origin and cause of fires, whether or not
causing death; to ascertain the origin and cause of explosions; and to find out
what caused certain kinds of accidents and other dangerous phenomena.
The obligation to determine causation, especially in relation to deaths, has
proved, as a matter of law and fact, an extremely problematic exercise going to
the very heart of the coronial function. Justice Nathan summed up the problem in
Harmsworth v The State Coroner.1 "the issue of causation ... has vexed
philosophers and judges since Socrates was obliged to drink the hemlock." As
McClemens I noted in Ex parte Minister of Justice; Re Malcolm,2 too, the forensic
difficulties posed by the need to make findings about causation, in particular in
the coronial context, will persist into the future.
In the latter quarter of the twentieth century the emergence of coronial law as
an area of intense media and popular interest,3 the glamorisation of the role of
the forensic pathologist and of the coroner, together with the increased incidence
of appellate litigation arising out of coroners' decisions, have shone a complex
spotlight upon decision-making in relation to causation by coroners. While
coronial law is part of the general law which deals with causes and results, it is a
distinctive characteristic which has generated its evolution. Historically, coroners
and coronial juries have been empowered to add "riders" to the formal records of
their decisions. These "riders" or recommendations have generally been directed
toward matters of health and safety or to the administration of justice. They
evolved because of the potential to reduce the incidence of avoidable deaths and
injuries.4 As a formal part of the decision-making process, they are a unique
component of this aspect of the law. The potential for riders, and, indeed, their
growing importance as a factor influencing the scope and content of coronial
inquests in some countries, in particular Australia, in turn has had a significant
impact upon the construction of causation as a concept under coronial law.
Particularly problematic aspects of the coronial function occur in the fact-
finding context of multi-factorial causes of death and fires, and also where it is
contended that a death has been caused, at least in part, by a failure on the part
of an institution to exercise proper care and supervision over a resident, such as a
person who is intellectually disabled, mentally ill or confined within a penal
institution. This kind of scenario has generated considerable jurisprudence in
recent times, but the law in relation to causation in such contexts remains
unresolved to a significant degree.
Concentrating on these difficult contexts in which causation has challenged
both coroners and appellate courts, this chapter explores the notion of causation
as it has evolved in the context of modern coronial law. It does so with reference
to the function of coroners' courts as inquisitorial modes of investigation into
death and associated phenomena.5
Coroners as Fact-Finders: An Historical Perspective
The early role of the coroner
The history of coroners dates back at least to the Council of Eyre in 1194. The
early duties of the coroner were essentially those of a tax gatherer, protecting the
pecuniary interests of the Crown, in particular those arising from the
administration of the criminal law,6 by ensuring the safekeeping of fines,
recognisances and treasure trove. Another important function in the early phase
of the coroner was the taking for the Crown of deodands. which were the
instruments that the coroner found to have been responsible for deaths. They
could be ships, carts, oxen or axes, but they had one thing in common – all of
such chattels had a value to the Crown. To the considerable financial advantage
of the monarch of the day, the coroner was responsible for the confiscation of
such goods from malefactors once he was satisfied that they had caused the death
of a deceased person.
In due course, the administrative role of the coroner7 developed so that when a
person was found dead, the coroner was notified and a jury assembled from the
local hundred super visum corporis8 with the body being laid on a table and
examined by the jury under the direction of the coroner. Evidence was taken and
a verdict arrived at by the jury. An important element of the verdict was the
determination of the cause of death.
Before the rise of area magistrates and local police forces, the coroner could
properly be described as the principal agent for investigation of crime, especially
homicide, and before the comparatively late introduction of medical evidence9
about the aetiology of death and the subsequent development of forensic
pathology, the coroner was the official whose duty it was to examine the body of
the deceased and determine the cause of the person's death. If there was evidence
to accuse someone of a homicide offence, the inquisition of the coroner's jury,
naming the suspect, operated as a bill of indictment and committed the suspect to
trial, in exactly the same way as the grand jury did in England until its abolition
in 1933.10
In the United States a variety of factors led to the abolition of the coronial role
and the institution of a system of medical examiners. Going with this
phenomenon was a concentration upon ascertaining from a medical, as well as a
legal perspective, the causes of death. Prominent amongst the factors was the fact
that early American coroners tended to be unqualified occupants of a minor
political office, typically farmers, carters or undertakers. As Johnson has pointed
out, "Political, not professional skills, were what was demanded of potential
coroners".11 While in the mid-nineteenth century, the role of the coroner was not
dissimilar to that in England, urban coroners in the United States began to
assemble significant political power and to command substantial police forces –
some had prosecutorial powers rivalling those of the district attorney. Corruption
became endemic and attempts at reform focused upon the need to change the
nature of the coroner's office, to depoliticise it and thereby to remove the
temptation for venery. Reformers
saw coroners as furthering the breakdown of law and order by allowing crime to go unpunished,
whether because of the inexperience of the coroner's physicians or simple cupidity. Physicians in
particular vilified coroners for their errors in post-mortem diagnosis and regularly lambasted them in the
medical press ... Socially and professionally elite urban physicians often led attempts to reform the
coroner's office, which took two forms. The simpler expedient was to demand the election of a physician
to the office, in the belief that medical science would be better served – or at least acknowledged – by a
medical practitioner. The more thoroughgoing approach was to seek abolition of the coroner's office and
its replacement by a medical examiner system.12
In due course, the medical lobby and the anti-corruption movement were
successful and a system of medical examiners was instituted throughout most
United States jurisdictions in place of the office of coroner.
The modern role of the coroner
In recent times, the coronial function has evolved considerably in Australia, New
Zealand and Canada, and to a lesser degree in England. This is so in many
regards. A major development in Australia is that in most States and Territories13
coroners sit without juries. This is a significant change in terms of the role that
coroners now play not only in relation to conducting investigations and ensuring
that inquest hearings run fairly and efficiently, but in terms of the complexity of
evidence that can be dealt with by coroners possessed of an expertise in grappling
with technical issues that is not shared by lay jurors.
Another important shift may be identified in the move toward the conduct of
quasi-judicial inquiries into the circumstances of deaths and certain other
phenomena with an increasing emphasis on making recommendations to prevent
repetition of life-endangering conduct. This has led the inquest away from being
a straightforward exercise directed toward determining identity of the deceased,
medical cause of death, proximate circumstances giving rise to death and
particulars necessary for registration of death. It has seen the inquest process
change so that it explores and makes findings about a complex array of factors
that have led to death, both indirectly and directly. Along with this
transformation has come an increasing preparedness by coroners to investigate
and make findings about a range of multifaceted factors leading to avoidable
deaths. In New Zealand, this even constitutes a specific reason for the holding of
an inquest. Section 15(1)(b) of the Coroners Act 1988 (NZ) provides that an
inquest can be held for the purpose of:
Making any recommendations or comments on the avoidance of circumstances similar to those in which
the death occurred, or on the manner in which any persons should act in such circumstances, that, in the
opinion of the coroner, may if drawn to public attention reduce the chances of the occurrence of other
deaths in such circumstances.14
Controversies about the modern role of the coroner
The changes, though, and the challenges facing the modern coroner have not
been without their critics. They have proved controversial. A Canadian decision,
for instance, has pointed out that "an inquest is not a trial; an inquest is not a
Royal Commission; an inquest is not a public platform; an inquest is not a
crusade".15 This said, the role of the coroner in functioning as a means of public
inquiry into how avoidable deaths can be avoided in the future is increasingly
entrenched as a feature of the modem inquest. Such a shift is not so much the
adoption by coroners of a significantly new function; it is a consolidation of a
longstanding feature of coronial inquisitions and inquests, dating back to the
earliest period of coronial decision-making.
Contextualising the modern role
For instance, coroners in fourteenth century England ordered that wells be filled
to prevent further drownings.16 A practical way to prevent further injury was
also identified in a 1487 inquest:
About 8pm on 6 Nov, when going home, John Aleyn of Rye, "hokemaker", by misadventure feil over "le
clyff" near the east side of the Austin Friars in a great wind. Because "le clyff" was crumbling and the
cause of his death, the land near it has been marked off 3 feet towards the king's highway there.17
Coroners' recommendations, reflecting a broad perspective and a pragmatic
bent toward reducing the incidence and causes of injury and death, may be seen,
too, in the investigation into the death of Thomas Drake in 1793 at Squirrel Farm,
Ewan Field in Kemble. The coroner's roll records that:
Drake – with another man standing on a stone at the top of a high precipice and quarry and moving and
drawing a large stone at the bottom by means of a large wheel and cord, slipped and fell and was killed.
Because the master of the works and the proprietor of the land were both at a distance and the
employment appeared very dangerous in future without better contrivance and the addition of a stage,
etc, it was adjudged highly requisite to adjourn and summon those with other evidence on 30 Aug., when
the said alterations and additions were agreed on and promised to be effected.18
Similarly, in 1788 at Chippenham a William Deverill was lost on a river
"supposed to have fallen in passing over a very narrow foot-bridge called Black-
Avon Bridge". The Coroner found that the deceased:
drowned by falling from a very dangerous and presentable foot-bridge over the Avon at the back of the
town. As well by reason of many past accidents as the present and to prevent future ones, it was judged
highly necessary to adjourn until after a convention by vestry of the chief inhabitants of Chippenham,
the result whereof is to widen and strengthen the bridge and render it safer in time of floods.19
Coroners' inquests in England were investigated by a Parliamentary Select
Committee in 1860, This occurred in the context of increasing hostility to the
institution of coroners in the United States and tensions between coroners and
magistrates on the one hand in England and between coroners and police forces
on the other hand.20 The scope of inquests was extended in an effort to address
social problems evident in an aspect of urban deaths. The Committee accepted
the view of the coroners and sanitarians that inquests should be held in all cases
of sudden or accidental death "for denunciation of the guilty, for the comfort of
the innocent, and for the information of the public, who should be taught the
nature and extent of the dangers that surround them."21
Appellate perspectives on the modern role
A number of modern descriptions of the coroner's function have explicitly
recognised this ancient function of the coroner to go beyond the circumstances of
the individual death and to initiate and facilitate measures to reduce the
likelihood of similar tragedies. Lord Lane CJ in R v South London Coroner; Ex
parte Thompson,22 for instance, stressed the need for the inquest process to
uncover the facts sufficiently to enable the adoption of counter-measures,
characterising the role of the inquest as being "to seek out and record as many of
the facts surrounding the death as public interest requires".23 Similarly, in People
First of Ontario v Niagara (Regional Coroner)24 it was held that, "The social and
preventative function of the inquest which focuses on the public interest has
become, in some cases, just as important as the distinctly separate function of
investigating the individual facts of individual deaths and the personal roles of
individuals involved in the death". However, it was acknowledged that "the
narrow investigative function" of the coroner to lay out the essential facts
surrounding a death "is still vital to the families of the deceased and to those who
are directly involved in the death".25
Advantages to the modern role
The benefits of the broader form of the coronial inquest process can be
summarised as follows:
determining the medical cause of death, thus providing accurate statistical
information on causes of death;
advancing medical knowledge;
investigating deaths to allay rumours or suspicion, and thereby to ensure
no foul play or wrongdoing slips through the net;
making recommendations to avoid future fatalities;
checking on the death registration system; and
enabling relatives to find out how the deceased died, which can assist in
the grieving process.26
The increasing focus upon the role of the coroner as a vehicle for preventing
causes of injury and death has become a characteristic of the evolution of
coronial law in Australia and Canada, particularly, since the mid-1980s.27
The Scope of Coronial Inquiries
Direct and indirect findings as to causation
A tension can be discerned between the vision harboured by many coroners as to
what should constitute the scope of the inquest process and the perception
articulated by both superior court reviews of coronial hearings and a series of
government-sponsored reviews of the modern inquest. The issue goes beyond a
hegemonic assertion of authority by contemporary coroners. It revolves around
an attempt by one component of the legal/bureaucratic process to fill a void left
by deficits in both the civil and criminal law – to address constructively scenarios
in which members of the community meet their deaths unnecessarily and
prematurely. In good part it is a public health issue.
In spite of the evolution of inquests, which have resulted in Australia, in
particular, in an avalanche of inquests taking in excess of 100 court days each,
appellate cases which have had reason to determine the breadth and extent of the
coroner's jurisdiction, and therefore, by inference the circumstances in which
findings of causation should be made, have tended to do so relatively narrowly. A
number of inquiries into the coronial jurisdiction have supported this approach
and indeed given an historical justification for it. For instance, the 1936 English
departmental committee on coroners under the chairmanship of Lord Wright28
urged that, save in cases of murder and manslaughter, inquests should be limited
in their scope to ascertainment of a finite number of statutorily mandated facts. It
expressed concern that inquests were too readily being used as a vehicle to elicit
facts and obtain riders for the purposes of imputing or escaping civil liability for
acts or omissions causing death.
Similarly, the 1971 report of the committee reviewing the law and practice
relating to death certification, under the chairmanship of Mr Brodrick QC29
argued that coronial findings ought in no sense to function as surrogates for
criminal or civil determinations. It argued that "In future the function of an
inquest should be simply to seek out and record as many of the facts concerning
the death as the public interest requires, without deducing from these facts any
determination of blame." A result of the report was the removal from English
coroners and their juries of the right to prefer homicide charges.30 Three years
later, coronial juries were precluded from adding a rider to their findings by an
amendment to the coronial rules.31
In Victoria, Australia, a similar inquiry took place under JG Norris in 1981,32
this giving rise shortly afterwards to new legislation in that jurisdiction
governing coroners.33 Again a key recommendation of the inquiry was that
coroners' determinations not trespass on either the civil or the criminal processes,
rather confining themselves to making findings arising out of the statutorily
mandated coronial obligations.
Appellate perspectives on the scope of inquests
However, this is not to suggest that coronial inquests are or should be of narrow
compass. As the Ontario Supreme Court held in People First of Ontario v Niagara
(Regional Coroner):34 "the social and preventative function of the inquest which
focuses on the public interest has become, in some cases, just as important as the
distinctly separate function of investigating the individual facts of individual
deaths and the personal roles of individuals involved in the death."
Uncertainty as to findings about causation in all jurisdictions is fuelled by the
fact that coronial law, while having its own identity and its own objectives,35
exists in a nether world between criminal law and civil law. A key issue in this
regard is the contemporary view of the purpose and legitimate scope of coronial
inquests. These have been addressed both by governmental reports and by
superior court decisions.
Appellate constructions of the coroner’s obligation to find “how”
the deceased died
A crucial constraint of the scope of coronial inquests and findings exists in the
meaning to be given to the coroner's task to ascertain, if possible, how a deceased
died. The leading appellate decision on the subject is that of the English Court of
Appeal in R v HM Coroner for North Humberside and Scunthorpe; ex parte
Jamieson,36 where the court read down in important ways the scope of inquests,
affirming an earlier decision on a similar subject37 in which Hutchison LJ had
found that the obligation of a coroner to find "how" a deceased died38 meant "by
what means" not "in what broad circumstances" and holding that "lack of care"
aggravated the cause of death only when there was a close connection between
the lack of care and the death.
Sir Thomas Bingham MR held that the task of the coroner is not to ascertain
"how the deceased died", which "might reach general and far-reaching issues but
'how ... the deceased came by his death', a more limited question directed to the
means by which the deceased came by his death."39
The nub of the decision from a point of view of its impact upon the scope of
future inquests lies in its narrow construction of the obligation of the coroner to
determine "how" any given deceased passed away, this being the umbrella under
which an inquest has the potential to analyse indirect factors suspected of
contributing to the causal chain resulting in a death.
A similar approach to that of the Court of Appeal in Ex parte Jamieson was
taken by Warren J of the Victorian Supreme Court in Kahn v West and Keown40
in relation to the proper ambit of findings about "how" the deceased came by her
death. The case was an appeal from a coroner's decision that police had not
contributed to the cause of death of an intoxicated, tomahawk-wielding
Aboriginal woman when they fatally shot her. Justice Warren held that the scope
of the coroner's duty to find "how" the deceased died is narrow: in the case before
her, it consisted in no more than the pulling of the trigger on the pistol held by a
police constable. It did not encompass the surrounding issues which might or
might not have affected whether the shooting was legitimate, namely in the
exercise of lawful self-defence. Such matters could include, for instance, indirect
issues such as police training and a range of reasonably direct causal factors
particular to the circumstances in which the particular constable fired his
weapon.41
Deaths in institutions: the closeness of required nexus and the
role of the coroner
One of the contexts in which causation in coronial law has been vigorously
contested and has fallen to be construed in terms of the sufficiency of nexus
between act or omission and consequence has been in relation to deaths
occurring in institutions such as prisons, psychiatric hospitals and residences for
those with intellectual disabilities. Frequently such deaths are a result of the
detainee's own actions, by reason of less than ideal care by the institution or in
the context of an insurrection within the facility.
A typical and tragic example was canvassed before the Coroner's Court in
Victoria in April 2001. An elderly resident of a supported rehabilitation facility
was known to be psychiatrically ill, with a range of positive and negative
symptoms of schizophrenia, as well as depressive symptomatology, for which he
was receiving anti-psychotic and anti-anxiolytic medication. In certain
circumstances, he would wander away from the facility, only later to be found
confused and sometimes at considerable risk. Community visitors, who have a
statutory mandate in Victoria to inspect such facilities, had commented of the
facility where he resided that little attention was given to the construction of
proper "service plans". Such plans, by force of statutory regulations,42 are
supposed to set out and plan the services given to vulnerable residents to assist in
meeting their individual needs. One day the resident again left the facility for no
known reason. The next day his body was found floating in a nearby river. The
task for the Coroner was to determine not so much whether the deceased died as
a result of foul play, for which there was no indication, but whether his death
was caused by inadequate planning and care being devoted to catering to
vulnerabilities that placed him at risk of avoidable death.43
One of the most significant judicial analyses of the issue has been that of the
English Court of Appeal in R v HM Coroner for North Humberside and
Scunthorpe; ex parte Jamieson44 The decision came in the wake of a series of
decisions in "lack of care" inquests where people had passed away arguably
because sufficient care had not been taken of them and they had died either
directly by their own act or by reason of neglect by a facility.45 The deceased,
who was serving a lengthy custodial sentence, hanged himself in a single cell in
the prison hospital after he had previously tried to commit suicide within the
prison. The key issue in the inquest related to the care extended to the deceased
by the prison authorities in the light of their knowledge of his mental state at the
relevant time. The coronial jury was not invited by the coroner to consider
whether the death of the deceased was caused or contributed to by lack of care.
Consistent with the Court of Appeal's decision as to when a coroner should
make findings on "how" a person died is its determination that a verdict of "lack
of care" is only legitimate when a failure on the part of authorities, such as those
running prisons, is causally connected with a death, that is to say when evidence
establishes a "close connection", rather than, for example, that the failure created
the general environment within which a desperate act such as a suicide, occurred.
What is necessary is a "clear and direct causal connection" between neglect or
self-neglect and death.46
However, the difficulties of application of this requirement have persisted in
the aftermath of She Court of Appeal decision in Ex parte Jamieson. In 2000, for
instance, Tomlinson J47 held that the requirement for a "clear and distinct causal
connection" does not carry the sense that such words convey when a court
considers a contract, a tort or an insurance policy. He held that the touchstone is
the opportunity to render care, in the narrow sense of the word, and thereby to
have prevented death. He found that the test of the Court of Appeal does not
mean that a conscientious person would necessarily have provided the care but
that the person had an opportunity to do something effective.
In the case before Tomlinson J, the deceased was an alcoholic who had been
arrested and detained at the Tamworth Police Station, later suffering a series of
fits that led to his death. Justice Tomlinson held that there was sufficient evidence
to conclude that, in light of information already in the possession of the police,
and in light of the deceased man's spilling of his tea on two separate occasions in
the context of severely shaking hands, there existed circumstances in which, had
the police promptly summoned medical aid, it was at least possible that the
deceased would not have died. Thus, he found it legitimate for the coroner to
have summed up to his jury in terms of there being a clear and direct causal
connection between the deficits in care on the part of the police and the death of
the deceased.48
Appellate rulings on the extent of the coroner’s investigative
responsibilities
By the time of the 1995 decision of the Court of Appeal in Ex Parte Jamieson and
the 2000 decision of Warren J, the controversies about the depth of inquiry that
the coroner should pursue were not new in Australia. An important analysis had
been undertaken in the first of the major modern Australian decisions on coronial
law, Harmsworth v State Coroner,49 an appeal to the Victorian Supreme Court
dealing with a coroner's inquest into the deaths of several men in a fire after the
construction by prisoners of a barricade inside a high security section of a jail.
Justice Nathan had been called upon to deal specifically with the propriety of a
coroner inquiring into a number of matters which had the potential to shed light
into how it was that prisoners in an electronically controlled, high security part
of Melbourne's main prison had engaged in what was clearly risky and ill-
considered behaviour, blocking up entrances and setting fire to bedding and other
combustibles. Objection had been taken to the liberal response of the coroner to
the attempt by relatives of the deceased to explore the background to the conduct
of the prisoners. The dispute therefore was in substance as to the remoteness of
the causal factors into which the coroner should inquire and as to which he
should be entitled to make findings.
Justice Nathan conceded that the prisoners would not have died, had they not
been in prison but found that a line had to be drawn in terms of the parameters
of the coroner's inquiry. He held that the sociological factors which related to the
causes of the men's imprisonment "could not be remotely relevant".50 Justice
Nathan had regard to how wide, prolix and indeterminate the inquest might be if
each of the many facets of the individual personalities of all those involved were
to be considered:
A coroner would be confronted with a need to enquire into the personal peculiarities of all of the
prisoners who barricaded themselves in. Both those who relented and those who did not. Whether, for
example, one group or person suborned others, and if so why and how. The personalities of all of the
prison officers who interacted with all of the prisoners could also be investigated. Even the interaction of
all of the other prisoners at any time in Jika with the deceased.51
The irony was that these aspects of the decision of Nathan J carried an element
of "tilting at windmills". What had been attempted in the inquest was an
exploration of why it was that the prisoners had responded to grievances with
those running the jail in the desperate and manifestly dangerous way that they
had. While there had been some suggestions, for political reasons, no doubt, that
the coroner should inquire generally into the deficits in the prison system, that
had never been a serious option, so far as the coroner had been concerned. What
had been taking place, though, from the perspective of the prison authorities was
a broader-based analysis of the factors precipitating the conduct of the prisoners,
which in turn resulted in their death, than they were comfortable with. Hence the
attempt by the prison authorities to curtail this aspect of the inquest. Clearly
enough the view of Nathan J was that the inquest had exceeded its proper
parameters. Unfortunately, he did not enunciate clear criteria for delimiting the
extent to which matters other than those absolutely proximate to the
circumstances of death should be the subject of inquiry at inquest.
The key aspect of the decision of Nathan J lies within its rationale for the
coroner's inquiry not being able to extend in the way that the presiding coroner
contemplated: "Such an inquest would never end, but worse it could never arrive
at the coherent, let alone concise, findings required" under the legislation. He
conceded that such an inquest could certainly provide material for riders and
comments, but he held that "[s]uch discursive investigations are not envisaged
nor empowered. ... They are not within jurisdictional power."52 He noted the
existence of a legislative entitlement on the part of the coroner to make
comments and recommendations, but held unequivocally that the "power to
comment is incidental and subordinate to the mandatory power to make findings
relating to how the deaths occurred, their causes and the identity of any
contributory persons".53 In this he was consistent with the approach taken in Re
Kelly, dec'd,54 an English inquest dealing with the death of an army captain in
Kenya from injuries he sustained in the course of a live firing exercise. Lord
Justice Pill and Newman J had emphasised that the power to make
recommendations so as to endeavour to avoid repetition of an avoidable death is
ancillary to inquest procedure, not its mainspring. Justice Nathan's decision
narrowed the extent in Australia to which an inquest can be directed toward
facilitating a coroner's preparedness to delve into the indirect circumstances
contributing to the cause of death and to make recommendations or comments,
the question being one of remoteness and not readily susceptible to definition.
What Nathan J's decision means in practice has not been clearly explicated. It
has become clear that relatively little heed has been taken of the decision by
coroners desirous of inquiring into matters some distance removed from why
fires engulfed vulnerable people, how it was that police shot unarmed civilians,
how persons in hospitals were treated in ways which resulted in deaths which
should not have happened, and why objectively dangerous incidents, such as
building implosions, took place, although contra-indicated by safety
considerations. Justice Nathan's desire that coroners should not inquire far along
the chain of causation beyond the immediate circumstances of death has not
resulted in Australian inquests becoming either of confined dimensions or of
short duration.
The Required Nexus Between Causative Factor and
Death
Magnitude of nexus
A number of difficult decisions have grappled specifically with the proper scope
of coronial findings on the issue of causation. As already indicated in the context
of neglect and self-neglect cases, in England the need for a "clear and causal
connection" between a causative factor and a death has often been emphasised by
the Court of Appeal but never further defined." In R v Cato,56 it was confirmed in
the criminal law context in England that if an act contributed significantly to the
cause of death, that is sufficient – it need not be the sole or even the principal
cause of death. Subsequently, in England, Lord Woolf MR in the Court of Appeal
applied criminal jurisprudence on the issue and held that what is necessary under
coronial law is that the act "more than minimally, negligibly or trivially
contributed to the death".57
In Australian law, there is no clear authority on the issue, although it has been
held that a coroner is obliged to endeavour to ascertain the "real cause" of death58
It seems under the criminal law that for a cause to be sufficient for criminal
liability, it must be a substantial and operating cause.59 As Lanham in this
collection points out, the position taken by the High Court of Australia is not
entirely clear, though different formulations being adopted in the leading
decision of Royall v R,60 where the question traversed was whether a person who
frightens another into killing herself accidentally, could be held to have caused
the death. Three judges referred to a significant contribution satisfying the test
for causation,61 and three (two of them the same) appear to have regarded
"significant" as meaning the same as "substantial".62
The common sense test
In Commissioner of Police v Hallenstein,63 Hedigan J examined the concept of
causation in negligence and then sought to apply it to the coronial context. He
expressly adopted the "common sense" test articulated by the High Court in E &
MH Stramare Pty Ltd,64 in particular the formulation of Deane J, the judgments
of the court arising in the context of the law of torts. Justice Deane posed as the
test whether "the question of causation arises in relation to attribution of fault or
responsibility whether an identified negligent act or omission of the defendant
was so connected with the plaintiff's loss or injury that, as a matter of ordinary
common sense and experience, it should be regarded as a cause of it".65
Causes and non-causes
In Keown v Khan66 the Victorian Court of Appeal had reason to pursue the notion
further. In the leading judgment of the court, Callaway JA distinguished between
causes and what he classified as "background circumstances", which he defined as
a "non-causal condition". His Honour held that in determining whether an act or
omission is a cause or merely a background circumstance "it will sometimes be
necessary to consider whether the act departed from a norm or standard or the
omission was in breach of a recognised duty".67
This meant that it is appropriate for the coroner to find that a person who kills
contributes to the cause of death, whether the person did so wrongfully or in
lawful self-defence. He held that a finding in relation to the identity of a person
contributing to a cause of death could then be made under the provision
mandating such a finding, which in Victoria and the Australian Capital Territory,
but not Tasmania, has now been repealed, or, as in England, under the umbrella
of the obligation to find how a deceased came by his or her death.
Multiple causes
The question, therefore, will often be one of degree in determining the extent of
the causal link. This is most problematic in the common situation where there are
multiple causative factors. An example is to be seen in recent British Columbia
coronial findings on causation:
The debris flow occurred progressively, commencing on a steep section of a naturally unstable slope. ...
An investigation team was organized by the Ministry of Forests to determine the causative factors.
Members of the team were specialists in slope stability, forest hydrology, soil science, forest engineering
and watershed management. The investigation reveals that the 42 days preceding 12 June 1990 were the
wettest on record. This situation created wet soil moisture conditions that set the stage for a precipitation
event. Along with this, the terrain in the vicinity of the initial debris flow is inherently unstable. This is
evident by the presence of pistol butt trees and old stump scarps on a hillslope of 34 degrees. There is a
clearcut area above the debris flow. This absence of trees changed the timing and the amount of water
delivered to the soil. The network of roads and ditches here increased the drainage source areas above
the debris flow. All of these factors although not singly causative, when combined the effect was
potentiated.68
A leading decision on the subject is that of McClemens J of the New South
Wales Supreme Court who was called upon in 1965 to grapple with the issue in
the context of a worker who had been admitted to hospital after taking ill at work
in suspicious circumstances suggestive of his having been the victim of chemical
poisoning in the workplace. He died after a lengthy period in hospital, the
terminal cause of death being pneumonia that he contracted shortly before
passing away.69 Justice McClemens expressly adopted the following passage in
the then current edition of Jervis on the Office and Duties of Coroners:
[O]steomyelitis, which is a septic disease of bone, may occur naturally or may, for instance, be caused by
an injury from a fall: tetanus, which is an infection, proceeds from a wound: an old lady may die in a
hospital from hypostatic pneumonia months after a fall which injured her hip. It is suggested that in so
far as the terminal cause of death directly and consequentially follows from a definable event the death
should be regarded as being caused by the definable event.
He went as far as to hold that the approach of the coroner in the case before
him of only focusing upon the terminal cause of death was erroneous and
misconceived the function of the coroner. He found that what the coroner was
obliged to do was to address the "real cause" of death, namely the disease, injury
or complication, not the mode of dying, such as, for instance, heart failure,
asphyxia or asthenia. In the case before him, he found that the pneumonia
suffered in his last days of hospitalisation was not the real cause of death of the
deceased; this was merely a final result operating on a man who was suffering
from a bed sore, bladder infection, secondary infection from the bed sore, who
was inert, vegetative, and incontinent of urine and faeces. He found that if what
brought the deceased to such a pass was "poisoning", then poisoning could be
said to be the real cause of death.
From an international perspective, the leading decision on the subject of
causation in a multi-factorial coronial context savours more of the malice of a
legal academic, setting an impossible problem for his or her students, than of real
life. However, although the facts explored in R v Poplar Coroner; ex parte
Thomas70 were quite extraordinary, they allowed an opportunity for important
consideration of where lines should be drawn in terms of remoteness or, put
another way, insignificance of certain of multiple factors contributing to a cause
of death.
Miss Thomas, a young woman of 17, suffered a severe attack of asthma at
1.00am. Her family telephoned for an ambulance when the attack began but only
received a recorded message, "There is no-one here at present. Please hold on and
we will answer your call as soon as we can". When the message was repeated,
they decided to take Miss Thomas to hospital in their car. On the way, she
deteriorated and the car was stopped. She was laid out on the pavement, alive but
unconscious and the police urgently requested an ambulance once more at
1.15am. Two further calls were made at 1.17am and 1.32am. An ambulance
arrived at 1.33am but before it arrived, Miss Thomas had suffered a cardiac
arrest. Attempts by ambulance personnel to revive her were fruitless.
The analysis of the Court of Appeal was directed toward whether Miss
Thomas' death was unnatural. For these purposes, though, the analysis was
relevant because the court held that the determination of whether the deceased's
death was natural or unnatural depended on what was the cause of death. The
argument mounted on behalf of the relatives of Miss Thomas was that the chance
of saving her life was unacceptably diminished because such a long time – 33
minutes – elapsed between the first abortive emergency call and the time when
finally the ambulance arrived. In essence, the reasoning pressed upon the Court
of Appeal was a version of lost chance reasoning.71
Lord Justice Dillon commented that:
It is easy to think of a variety of different scenarios as a result of which an ambulance could have arrived
too late to save a patient who had suffered a severe attack of asthma like Miss Thomas's, eg (i) the
distance from the ambulance centre to the patient's home was too great for there to have ever been any
chance of the ambulance arriving in time to save the patient, (ii) there was much more traffic than
normal in the locality and so the ambulance was delayed and arrived just too late, (iii) the ambulance
was diverted on its journey and had to take a much longer route because of flooding caused by a burst
water main, which may have been due to lack of proper maintenance by the water company, (iv) a newly
installed computer installed by the ambulance service to handle emergency calls more efficiently
malfunctioned, as newly installed computers are prone to, or (v) the ambulance came late because the
ambulance crew were inefficient and the management was slack.72
On each of these scenarios, he (with Farquaharson LJ agreeing) found that the
cause of death was the asthmatic attack. Lord Justice Simon Brown was more
hesitant in his concurrence, specifically accepting that courts often find there to
have been multiple causes to a given eventuality. He commented that if a civil
action were brought, it could not be doubted that Miss Thomas' death was in part
caused by the late arrival of the ambulance. Thus, his inquiry was into what view
should be taken of causes that were secondary but were "not self-evidently
irrelevant". He provided this example:
Take a medical condition between the two extremes postulated by the coroner in this case – neither a
condition like a strangulated hernia or ectopic pregnancy which clearly ought never to result in death
and which, if it does, will require an inquest, but not a condition as serious as this deceased's asthma
with its considerable risk of natural mortality rate; assume that consequent upon some clear failure of
the emergency services the condition, unusually, proved fatal. Would not common sense dictate that that
was an unnatural death?73
He concluded that the circumstances before him would have constituted a
cause if the arrival of the ambulance had constituted a more extreme failure of
the service than it did.
Standard of Proof of Causation in Coronial Law
Findings as to causation, as in relation to other matters in respect of which
coroners are statutorily obliged to make findings, are on the criminal standard of
beyond reasonable doubt in England,74 at least in respect of matters such as
homicide, including suicide,75but on the balance of probabilities in Canada76 and
Australia.77 In Australia, this analysis is affected by the so-called "Briginshaw
principle" 78 which results in a coroner needing to factor into his or her
determination both the seriousness of allegations against a person and the likely
impact of a finding that the allegations are made out. Thus, in Anderson v
Blashki79 Gobbo J held that because of the gravity of an assault allegation in the
coronial context, proof of what in fact constituted a criminal act had to be
"cogent and exact and when considering such proof, weight must be given to the
presumption of innocence."80 In addition, he held that the extremely deleterious
effect that an adverse finding would have on the character of the person accused,
as well as upon his reputation and employment prospects, meant that that weight
of evidence was necessary which was commensurate with the gravity of the
allegation against him. In practice, this means that in some circumstances, where,
for instance, the allegation is tantamount to murder, the coroner needs to arrive
at a high level of satisfaction before making a finding about contribution in
relation to cause of death. The law in Canada is not dissimilar, proof where there
are serious allegations being to "a high degree of probability".81
Conclusion
In Environmental Agency v Empress Car Co (Abertillery) Ltd,82 Lord Hoffmann
observed that: "[C]ommon sense answers to questions of causation will differ
according to the purpose for which the question is asked." To a similar effect,
Gaudron J in Chappel v Hart83 has pointed out that "Questions of causation are
not answered in a legal vacuum. Rather, they are answered in the legal
framework in which they arise." The unique nature of the coronial jurisdiction
has generated its own substantial jurisprudence in relation to causation. Much of
it is affected by the emerging role of the modern coroner as an inquirer and
maker of recommendations about avoidable death.
It has become apparent that the call in the common law of Australia to have
resort simply to common sense has not proved adequate. The need for causation
findings to be made in all inquests has brought about many analyses of difficult
issues such as the criteria for attributing not just causation but causation framed
in such a way as to denote or imply fault. In addition, many cases have had to
confront where the cut-off should be made in terms of proximate causation and
indirect causation. No consistent or coherent approach can readily be discerned,
the most substantial set of analyses being present in the English jurisprudence
concerning neglect and self-neglect, where the demand of the appellate courts has
been that the nexus between the unsatisfactory conduct and the death be close,
namely clear and direct. Inevitably, some room remains open for subjectivity, but
the message from the English Court of Appeal is that the connection cannot in
any sense be remote.
In Australia the criminal law appears generally to have been adopted in
coronial law, meaning that the connection between the act or omission and the
death must be "real" or perhaps "significant" or "substantial". Confidence in
relation to a coroner's finding of causation must be beyond reasonable doubt in
England but on the sliding scale of the balance of probabilities in Australia and
Canada. Clear criteria for differentiating amongst differently contributing
causative factors where they exist in numbers have not been identified, save that
in respect of any given causative factor the tests in the criminal law seem to be
applied.
For coroners the core function of identifying both the circumstances around a
death, in particular, those which gave rise to a death, and attributing a causative
role to them, are unresolved. This is highly problematic as determination of
causation is so central to the coronial function as to leave unclear the extent to
which it is proper for coroners to inquire into, and make decisions about, indirect
factors giving rise to deaths and other phenomena. This has been addressed in
New Zealand's coronial legislation with sl5 of the Coroners Act 1988 (NZ)
permitting a coroner to inquire into matters that he or she concludes are likely to
result in recommendations conducive to public health and safety. There is much
to be said for such a revised conceptualisation of the coroner's role.
It is likely, arid a constructive development, that the increasingly recognised
role of the coroner as an instrument for identifying, developing and promoting
community safety will lead to the adoption of an approach along the lines of that
in New Zealand. It assists the community little to identify by formal coronial
findings only the proximate or terminal events around deaths. Frequently, it is as
to the environment within which the acts and omissions which resulted in a
death, as well as in relation to the potentiating and exacerbating nature of factors
leading to the death, that analysis needs to be undertaken if the incidence of
avoidable death is to be reduced. Often it is intangible factors such as workplace
culture, longstanding practices of neglect or insensitivity, lack of awareness of
options different from those adopted that need to be identified if important
changes are to be made which will reduce unsafe practices. It is coroners who are
best positioned as a result of the formal hearing process of inquests to discern
such issues, to make findings about them and to make recommendations about
how they can be changed. A range of public policy reasons, distinct and separate
from those operating in the civil and criminal contexts, suggest that the notion of
causation needs to be construed more broadly in the coronial context than in
most others within the contemporary legal system.
* Barrister in full-time private practice in Melbourne, Australia, Professor in the Department, of
Psychological Medicine, Adjunct Professor in the Law Faculty and an Honorary Associate Professor
in the Department of Forensic Medicine at Monash University, Adjunct Professor in the Department
of Law and Legal Studies, La Trobe University.
1 [1989] VR 989 at 995.
2 [1965] NSWR 1598 at 1604.
3 A point made by Australian High Court Justice, Ian Callinan, in his fictional work: I Callinan, The
Coroner's Conscience, Central Queensland University Press, Rockhampton, 1999, at p9.
4 See D McCann, "The Range of Findings Open to the Coroner" in H Selby (ed), The Aftermath of Death,
Federation Press, Sydney, 1992; G Johnstone, "Coroners' Inquiries and Recommendations" in H Selby
(ed), The Inquest Handbook, Federation Press, Sydney, 1998.
5 See R v South London Coroner, ex parte Thompson (1982) 126 SJ 125; In re Rapier (1986) 150 JP 481.
6 See W Holdsworth, A History of English Law, Vol 1, 7th edn, Methuen & Co, London, 1964, 84-5.
7 See K Waller, Coronial Law and Practice in New South Wales, 3rd edn, Butterworths, Sydney, 1994, 1.
8 See DM Walker, Oxford Companion to Law, Oxford University Press, Oxford, 1980 for definition of
"hundred" and "hundred court".
9 M Baden, Unnatural Death: Confession of a Medical Examiner, Sphere Books, London, 1989, at p48; DS
Jones, Speaking for the Dead, Ashgate, Dartmouth, 2000.
10 See RH Vickers, The Powers and Duties of Police Officers and Coroners, TH Flood & Co, London, 1889,
at p214.
11 J Johnson, "Coroners, Corruption and the Politics of Death: Forensic Pathology in the United States" in
M Clark & C Crawford, Legal Medicine in History, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1994,
269.
12 Ibid, at p272.
13 See I Freckelton & D Ranson (eds), Coronial Law and Medicine, Oxford University Press, Melbourne,
2002 (forthcoming).
14 See also Law Commission of New Zealand, Coroners, Report No 62, Law Commission, Wellington,
2000.
15 See People First of Ontario v Niagara (Regional Coroner) (1991) 85 DLR (4th) 174, 187.
16 See G Johnstone, "Coroner's Inquiries and Recommendations" in H Selby (ed), The Inquest Handbook,
Federation Press, Sydney, 1998, 38.
17 RF Hunnisett, The Medieval Coroner, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1961.
18 Ibid, at p34.
19 Ibid, at p143.
20 See J Sim & T Ward, "The Magistrate of the Poor? Coroners and Deaths in Custody in Nineteenth
Century England" in M Clark & C Crawford, Legal Medicine in History, Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, 1994, 256ff.
21 Registrar-General, Nineteenth Annual Report, PP, 1857-8, XXIII, 1, 198.
22 (1982) 126 Sol Jo 625.
23 R v South London Coroner; Ex parte Thompson (1982) 126 Sol Jo 625 (QB), Lord Lane CJ at 628.
24 (1991) 85 DLR 174 at 183-4.
25 Ibid, at p184.
26 See P Matthews. "Involuntary Manslaughter: A View from the Coroner's Court" (1996) 60 Crim LJ 189
at 191. See also the Report of the Committee on Death Certification and Coroners, September 22 1971,
Cmnd 4810, chaired by N Brodrick QC; H Hallenstein, "Coronership – the Practical Application of
Law, Medicine, Science and Specialty Knowledge", paper presented to Australian Institute of
Criminology Conference, Surfers Paradise, Institute of Criminology, 1993. The coronial hearing as a
procedure for investigating controversial deaths has its detractors, however. In England, see for
instance. G Robertson, The Justice Game, Random House, London, 1998, at p201.
27 See, for example, G Johnstone, "An Avenue for Death and Injury Prevention", in H Selby (ed), The
Aftermath of Death, Federation Press, Sydney, 1992; J Harrison & J Moller, "Learning from Experience
– Toward Prevention", in H Selby (ed), The Inquest Handbook, Federation Press, Sydney, 1997.
Concerns about the extent to which this may fundamentally change the role of the coroner have also
been expressed:
I Freckelton, "Expert Proof in the Coroner's Jurisdiction", in H Selby (ed), The Aftermath of Death,
Federation Press, Sydney, 1992. For the view of the coroner in a "social context", see R v Faber [1976]
2 SCR 9 at 30 per De Grandpre J.
28 Cmnd 5070.
29 Cmnd 4810.
30 Criminal Law Act 1977 (UK), s56(1).
31 See M Levine & J Pyke, Levine on Coroners' Courts, Sweet & Maxwell, London, 1999, at pl45.
32 JG Norris, The Coroners Act 1958: A General Review, Law Printer, Melbourne, 1981.
33 Coroners Act 1985 (Vic). It proved to be a model for a number of Australian states and territories.
34 (1991) 85 DLR (4th) 174 at 183-4.
35 See R v South London Coroner; ex parte Thompson (1982) 126 Sol Jo 625; P Matthews, "Involuntary
Manslaughter: A View from the Coroner's Court" (1996) 60 Criminal Law Journal 189 at 191; Report
of the Committee on Death Certification and Coroners (chair: N Brodrick QC), Cmnd 4810, 1971.
36 [1995] QB 1.
37 R v HM Coroner for Birmingham, ex parte Secretary of State for the Home Department (1990) 155 JP 107
per Hutchison LJ and Watkins LJ.
38 Under s11 of the Coroners Act 1988 (UK).
39 [1995] QB 1 at 8.
40 [1999] VSC 530.
41 Warren J's decision was successfully appealed to the Victorian Court of Appeal in Khan v Keown [2001]
VSCA 137 but the general issue of the meaning of "how" was not finally resolved.
42 Health Services (Residential Care) Regulations 1991 (Vic), Reg 303(1)(b).
43 Re David Nixon Deceased, Victorian Coroner's Court, 2001.
44 [1995] QB 1.
45 R v HM Coroner for Birmingham, ex parte Secretary of State for the Home Department (1990) 155 JP
107; R v HM Coroner for East Berkshire, ex parte Buckley (1992) 157 JP 425; R v Coroner for Inner
North London, ex parte Diesa Koto (1993) 157 JP 857; R v HM Coroner for South Yorkshire, ex parte
Stringer (1993) 158 JP 453; R v HM Coroner for Western District of east Sussex; ex parte Homberg
(1994) 158 JP 357.
46 R v HM Coroner for North Humbersicle and Scunthorpe; ex parte Jarnieson [1995] QB 1 at 26; see also R
v HM Coroner for Swansea and Gower, ex parte Chief Constable of Wales (199) 164 JP 191 at 197.
47 In R v HM Coroner for Coventry, ex parte Chief Constable of Staffordshire (2000) 164 JP 665.
48 See too R v HM Coroner for Wiltshire, ex parte Clegg (1997) 161 JP 521 at 529.
49 [1989] VR 989.
50 Harmsworth v State Coroner [1989] VR 989, Nathan J at 995. See also the analysis in People First of
Ontario v Niagara (Regional Coroner) (1991) 85 DLR (4th) 174, 187.
51 Harmsworth v State Coroner [1989] VR 989 at 996.
52 Ibid.
53 Ibid.
54 (1996) 161 JP 417 at 427.
55 C Dorries, Coroner's Courts: A Guide to Law and Practice, John Wiley & Sons, Chichester, 1999, at p223.
56 (1976) 62 Cr App R 41 at 46.
57 R v HM Coroner for Exeter & East Devon; ex parte Palmer, unreported, Court of Appeal, 10 December
1997.
58 Ex parte Minister of Justice; Re Malcolm [1965] NSWR 1598 (SC), McClemens J at 1604.
59 Eg R v Hallett [1969] SASR 141; R v Evans and Gardiner (No 2) [1976] VR 523.
60 (1991) 172 CLR 378.
61 Brennan J at 298; Deane and Dawson JJ at 411.
62 Deane and Dawson JJ at 298; McHugh J at 449.
63 [1996] 2 VR1.
64 (1991) 171 CLR 506 at 522.
65 [1996] 2 VR 1 at 17.
66 (1998) 101 A Crim R 503.
67 Ibid, at p511. Compare the so-called "NESS test": a person's breach is a cause of death or injury if it is a
necessary element of a set of conditions sufficient to bring about the death or injury: R Wright,
"Causation, Responsibility, Risk. Probability, Naked Statistics, and Proof: Pruning the Bramble Bush
by Clarifying the Concepts" (1988) 73 Iowa Law Review 1001; see also D Hamer, "Proof of Causation
and Quantum in an Unpredictable World" (1999) 23 Melbourne University Law Review 557.
68 Kozub v HMTQ [2000] BCSC 0194 at [5].
69 Ex parte Minister of Justice; Re Malcolm [1965] NSWR 1598.
70 [1993] QB 610.
71 For "loss of chance reasoning" in the economic loss context, see Hotson v East Berkshire Area Health
Authority [1987] AC 750 at 759-60; Sellars v Adelaide Petroleum NL (1994) 179 CLR 332 at 355; in the
context of medical negligence, see Naxakis v Western General Hospital (1999) 162 ALR 540; Chappel
v Hart (1998) 156 ALR 517; Gavalas v Singh [2001] VSCA 23; N Moshinsky, "'Loss of a Chance of
Successful Treatment" (2000) 8 Journal of Law and Medicine 216; I Freckelton, "Malpractice Actions
Against Health Care Professionals" in I Freckelton & K Petersen (eds), Controversies in Health Law,
Federation Press, Sydney, 1999. See also Luntz in this collection.
72 At All ER 386.
73 Ibid, at p3 88.
74 See R v West London Coroner's Court; ex parte Gray [1988] 1 QB 467; R v Wolverhampton Coroner; ex
parte McCurbin [1990] 2 All ER 759.
75 See R v HM Coroner for Solihull; ex parte Nutt [1993] COD 449; R v HM Coroner for Northamptonshire,
ex parte Tomkinson [1996] COD 191.
76 Re Beckon (1992) 93 DLR (4th) 161 at 175.
77 See Anderson v Blashki [1993] 2 VR 89; Secretary, Department of Health and Community Services v
Gurvich [1995] 2 VR 69; Chief Commissioner of Police v Hallenstein [1996] 2 VR 1.
78 Briginshaw v Briginshaw (1938) 60 CLR 336.
79 [1993] 2 VR 88 at 95-6.
80 Citing Cuming Smith & Co Ltd v Western Farmers Co-operative Ltd [1979] VR 129 at 147.
81 Re Beckon (1992) 93 DLR (4th) 161 at 175.
82 [1999] 2 AC 22 at 29.
83 (1998) 195 CLR 232 at 238 [7].