13 Issues of Medical and Legal Causation
Relating to Alzheimer’s Disease
ROBERT HELME AND DANUTA MENDELSON*
Introduction
Biological, physical and environmental factors can cause or induce all kinds of
medical conditions, including dementia, in humans, apes or mice. In
contradistinction, only humans can cause or produce legally binding directives
and instruments. In private law, these include testamentary and inter vivos
dispositions, as well as directions about medical treatment. Thus, the discourse of
causation differs in medicine and law. Issues of causation in the two disciplines
intersect, however, when the validity of a transaction, a disposition or executed
instrument is questioned on the ground of legal competence. The issue is
complicated by the fact that the medical nature of dementia is yet to be fully
ascertained, and that its progress and symptoms are often misunderstood.
The law presumes that adults of "sound mind" are legally competent.
Consequently, an otherwise binding decision may not be followed when the
presumption of "sound mind" is displaced. The terms "sound mind" and
competence are not part of medical nosology. They refer to a person's legal status:
his or her cognitive competence to make valid dispositions and binding decisions.
Competence can only be determined by a judge or an administrative body
empowered to make guardianship decisions. Psychiatrists or a psychologists may
be called in to assist in ascertaining someone's decision-making capacity.1 In the
eyes of the law then, the cause of change in the validity of a person's dispositions
and decisions is a lack of competence. Medicine may provide a diagnosis and an
explanation of the condition that impaired the person's decision-making capacity,
however, the aetiology – the precise medical cause of the condition, is usually
only of secondary interest to this area of the law.
Yet an understanding of the nature of dementia and its nuances can be vital in
determining a person's competence. This is because the concept of legal
competence traditionally refers to the person's cognitive capacity "to understand
and process information so that a decision can be made and communicated",2 and
dementia is a cognitive disorder characterised by gradual onset and continuing
cognitive decline. However, the process of this decline fluctuates, and, as will be
discussed below, a demented person may retain reasonable cognitive capacity in
relation to certain life activities but not others.3 Consequently, a mere diagnosis
of dementia cannot not of itself pre-determine the issue of competence.
Alzheimer's disease is presently considered to be the most common cause of
dementia.4 The vast majority of persons previously labelled as suffering senility
prove to have Alzheimer's disease. The prevalence of this disease in all countries
where data are available, including Australia,5 increases exponentially from 1 per
cent of those aged 60 to more than 30 per cent of those aged 80. It is estimated
that by 2021, there will be 2.26 million Australians aged over 65, or 12 percent of
the population. The number of Australians over 80 years old has grown from
260,000 in 1991 to a projected 560,000 in 2001, and will grow to 790,000 in 2021.6
The legal issue of competence involves a medical understanding of capacity to
consent to matters relating to medical treatment and decisions relating to wealth
transfer through inter vivos and testamentary dispositions. The growing
importance of such an understanding is highlighted by rapidly growing costs to
society associated with the health and welfare of older people and the high
proportion of wealth owned by this age group.7 Health and welfare costs increase
approximately five-fold for persons over 65 years of age over younger adults.
Conversely, it is estimated that most of Britain's and Australia's wealth is owned
by these same people.
In several jurisdictions legislative attempts have been made to deal with the
issue of consent to and refusal of medical treatment by incompetent persons. The
enactments usually provide for appointment of agents with enduring medical
powers of attorney.8 These instruments, however, can be executed only by
persons of "sound mind". In cases where dementia has rendered the person
incompetent, a legal guardian with power to make medical decision on behalf of
the patient may be appointed by a superior court of record under its inherent
parens patriae jurisdiction, a Guardianship Board or Tribunal. Issues of wealth
transfer are regulated under succession and probate legislation. Some
jurisdictions have provisions that enable courts to authorise wills for mentally
incompetent persons.9 Dispositions of vulnerable and mentally impaired persons
are also protected by common law actions of duress and fraud, and by equitable
remedies of unconscionability and undue influence. This chapter will focus on
only two aspects of medical and legal causation relating to Alzheimer's disease –
questions of decisional competence relating to refusal and withdrawal of medical
treatment, and issues of competence and decisional capacity relating to inter
vivos and testamentary dispositions in the context of the equitable doctrines of
unconscionability and undue influence.
Legal Tests of Competence
Not surprisingly, given its socio-economic importance, the jurisprudence of legal
competence for the purposes of private law10 was initially developed in the area
of testamentary law. Sound mind is a prerequisite of testamentary capacity.11 In
Greenwood v Greenwood12 and Harwood v Baker,13 English courts provided an
undemanding test of competence or "sound mind". It required testators to know:
the nature and extent of their property; the natural objects of their bounty, and
how the will disposed of their property. They also were required to have the
ability to make a rational plan for the disposition of the property.14 Once these
criteria were met, testators were considered to be of sound mind, and were free to
make eccentric or unusual dispositions. The notion of "sound mind" was
negatively defined by Lord Cockburn CJ in Banks v Goodfellow.15 His Lordship
wrote that:
It is essential ... that no disorder of his [the testator's] mind should poison his affections, pervert his sense
of right, or prevent the exercise of his natural faculties – that no insane delusions shall influence his will
in disposing of his property and bring about a disposal of it, which if the mind had been sound, would
not have been made.16
Lord Cockburn thus defined testamentary capacity in terms of absence of two
inter-related "disorders of mind". The first relates to the testator's emotional,
moral and cognitive capacity ("poisoning of affections"; "perverting" of the sense
of right; impairment in the exercise of "natural faculties"). The second, in the
form of "insane delusions", relates to cognition, and could be described as a
psychiatric disorder. More recently, "insane delusions" have been re-interpreted as
beliefs and ideations that are "not capable of rational explanation or amenable to
reason, and ... not explicable by reference to the subject person's education and
culture."17 However, the mere presence of a "disorder of mind" is not sufficient to
displace the presumption of "sound mind", and hence testamentary capacity.18 To
ground invalidity, such delusions, poisoned affections, etc, must influence the
person's will in disposing of the property, in a way in which he or she would not
have done otherwise. The standard for determining the existence of testamentary
capacity is therefore subjective. The question is not how a reasonable person in
the shoes of the testator would have decided to dispose of the property in
question, but what the actual testator would have done, absent the "disorder of
mind".
Thus the test of competence for testamentary capacity, involves the person's
intellectual capacity to understand, weigh and consider the nature of the
proposed course of action.19 For example, in Banks v Goodfellow, the testator
though convinced that he was pursued by evil spirits, nevertheless had the
capacity to attend to his financial affairs and had given clear and rational
instructions for his will, which left the greater part of his fortune to the niece
who had looked after him. His will was challenged by other members of the
family, but it was held that it was valid, on the basis that an "insane delusion"
from which the testator suffered did not influence his capacity to make
testamentary dispositions.20
Finally, "free will" in the sense of autonomy – the ability to form independent
judgment – is also a prerequisite for both, valid property dispositions and binding
directions regarding medical treatment.
Thus there are three cumulative legal standards which test the validity of
binding dispositions and directions: absence of "internal" coercion of the will
through "disorder of mind"; absence of external coercion of the person's will by
other parties; and the cognitive competence to understand the subject-matter of
the decision. Several major questions arise in relation to these tests. The first
concerns the applicability of general legal standards for valid medical treatment
decisions of persons with intricate cognitive and affective disorders caused by
dementia. The second is a jurisprudential issue of the tension between the
importance of individual autonomy in lawful decisions regarding one's property21
on the one hand, and law's willingness to invalidate or vary inter vivos and
testamentary dispositions on the other.22 Underlying these questions is the
problem of how the courts and physicians interpret behavioural, cognitive,
affective and expressive aspects of dementia. The final legal question posed is
whether the present tests of competence and sound mind are appropriate to
safeguard the interests of persons diagnosed with dementia.
Medical Nature of Dementia
Alzheimer's disease is but one cause of dementia. Indeed, it has been postulated
that there are a number of Alzheimer's diseases and that they occur
simultaneously with other pathologic forms of dementia. When severe, the
diagnosis of this and other dementias is easily made. In its earliest stages,
however, even the most skilled clinicians remain unsure. This has led to a
classification of severity of 0.5, 1, 2 and 3, where 1, 2 and 3 correspond to mild,
moderate and severe degrees of the disease. The category of 0.5 is unsure
territory, where the diagnosis may be that of normality within a wide range of
functional ability; examples of which might include eccentricity, senile squalor
syndrome and age-associated memory impairment. Once the examiner is sure
that cognitive impairment is present, other diagnostic dilemmas arise. Firstly,
there are the more than 150 documented causes of dementia to be considered.
Some, such as depression, the effects of concomitant medication, and intercurrent
illness which may lead to acute or subacute brain failure or delirium, must be
excluded by history and laboratory investigation, and specific treatments need to
be instituted.
The clinical course of a patient with Alzheimer's disease is most easily judged
at a distance in place and time. The attentive observer, however, is always
impressed by fluctuation in cognitive and emotional abilities, whether globally or
individually, from moment to moment, hour to hour, day to day and week to
week. Intercurrent reversible illnesses compound this fluctuation. This makes the
task of judging competence particularly difficult. The final diagnosis of
Alzheimer's disease depends on histological examination, a facility rarely present
during life because brain biopsy is not generally accepted as a routine
investigation in most western countries given the potential for serious associated
morbidity. At best, clinical diagnosis is associated with only a ninety per cent
sensitivity and specificity for assured diagnosis. The judgment of pathologists as
the final gold standard arbiter has also been questioned, and found to be less than
hundred percent reliable. This is not surprising when it is realised that the
aetiology and pathogenesis of this disease remain uncertain.
Dementia is a behavioural syndrome best thought of as a consequence of
chronic brain failure. There is an assumption that the affected individual has
previously had sufficient intellectual capacity to function as a normal
independent member of the community. Increasing age is associated with
diminished organ structure and function (including brain function), which is a
consequence of the biological processes of ageing, age-associated disease, disuse,
and short and long term latent effects of environmental stimuli. Current medical
understanding of the processes underlying these factors is limited. There is a
limited capacity to measure the effects of each factor, the relative contribution
one makes to the other, and any interactions between them. Clinical assessment
and diagnosis depend on observation of the signs of the condition, asking the
patient or a carer about symptoms; obtaining social and family history from the
patient or a carer, and, performing physical examination and laboratory
investigations. With a wide range of acceptable errors to each of these
components, statistically inevitable multiplication of these errors in identifying a
single cause for a decline in function, it is easy to understand that diagnostic
precision and an ability to monitor the indicia of well being are low in the
practice of medicine for older people. This situation is compounded by
interaction of the several disease states, and discrete treatments for all or some of
them, that are usually present in the older person.23
Refusal, Withholding and Withdrawal of Medical
Treatment
Patients with Alzheimer's disease and their carers are also faced with the effects
of ageing biology, disuse and environment. One pertinent example is the paradox
whereby the use of narcotic analgesics may worsen pain in such a person. Pain is
a sensory, emotional and cognitive experience. We all make cognitive appraisals
of noxious stimuli which are compared to beliefs we have about their influence.
Generally, coping strategies that lead to positive behaviours tend to reduce pain:
we wince, limp, go to the doctor, take analgesics and reason that the pain must
not otherwise dominate our lives. These abilities are not so available to the
patient with Alzheimer's disease. For example, patients working at the limit of
their cognitive ability may refuse medication. In such cases, the side-effects of a
narcotic on cognition, and thereby coping capacity, may outweigh its analgesic
effect. A further complication is their manifestation in opposite ways in different
patients, or even in the same patient: consistent screaming at one time, deathly
silence and inactivity at another. Both are manifestations of suffering.
With regard to cognitive losses, inability to change concept is often the easiest
loss to document objectively, and is usually associated with a particular decline in
capacity for self-care. It also means that a person may well, and repeatedly,
understand a line of reasoning at one point in time, but an examiner may be
unable to demonstrate a similar understanding at a similar level of complexity
when the patient is examined serially, or at another time. Understanding of these
clinical features of dementia is particularly important in cases where the patient
refuses life-saving medical treatment or requests euthanasia. Modern common
law jurisprudence has developed a doctrine of inviolability of individual
decisions regarding one's body.24 Under the law of trespass to the person, a
competent adult patient has the right to make a voluntary choice whether to
refuse or consent to any medical intervention, including life-saving or life-
sustaining treatment.25 The right to refuse life-saving or life-sustaining medical
treatment is commonly referred to as the "right to die". Lord Mustill in the
Airedale NHS Trust v Bland expressed this rule in the following terms:
If the patient is capable of making a decision on whether to permit treatment and decides not to permit it
his choice must be obeyed, even if on any objective view it is contrary to his best interests. A doctor has
no right to proceed in the face of objection, even if it is plain to all, including the patient, that adverse
consequences and even death will or may ensue.26
The rule is based on the notion that with regard to voluntary decisions of
competent adults, "the principle of the sanctity of human life must yield to the
principle of self-determination."27 In relation to patients with mild to moderate
dementia, the undemanding criterion of competence may well be fulfilled
enabling them to make valid decisions to refuse medical treatment. Common
examples of such decisions include requests for institution or withdrawal of
mechanical life-sustaining treatments, the use of antibiotics, antidepressants,
fluids and food, and restraint. Yet many patients with mild dementia have a
syndrome known as "word-finding difficulty". They are often unable to articulate
ideas (expressive aphasia), or to apprehend (internalise) ways of reasoning other
than the one they have adopted. The vocabulary of such patients is very limited.
Therefore, once they have articulated an idea, they keep reiterating it, as if
"stuck" in the groove of their narrow and rigid conceptual framework. It is in this
context that repeated requests for euthanasia or repeated denials of a medical
condition and refusal of life-saving medical treatment need to be understood.
Frequently, mild to moderate dementia is co-morbid with depression, which is
an affective disorder.28 This raises an ethical dilemma associated with the first
generation of medications known to influence cognition and behaviours in
patients with Alzheimer's disease. These medications are only of partial benefit in
that they do not arrest cognitive decline. Difficult medical decisions that must
made include a judgment on whether it is appropriate to prolong depression in
patients with mild to moderate disease who still have insight into their condition,
and when to withdraw treatment in someone of moderate to severe impairment
knowing that their decline will probably accelerate?29 The legal causative
conundrum is whether continuation of depression or acceleration of dementive
process should be ascribed to the underlying illness or the medical decision to
withdraw the medication. The common law's approach to causation is not
settled.30 However, it is agreed that "in the realm of negligence, causation is
essentially a question of fact, to be resolved as a matter of common sense."31
Consequently, the court, presumably, would regard dementia rather than the
physician's decision to withdraw the medication to be the legal cause of the
patient's condition.
With all patients who have early (0.5) to moderate (2) dementia, great caution
is needed to ascertain whether their decisions and statements adequately reflect
their affective state. Given the difficulties of psychiatric assessment, when a
person refuses medical treatment while expressing the wish to die, the right to
exercise this choice should be held paramount only after a very careful
consideration of the way in which the decision was made, and its social,
emotional and organic context. In the case of In re T,32 Lord Donaldson MR
suggested the following four rules pertaining to the patient's capacity to make
legally binding choices concerning medical treatment:
(1) Prima facie every adult has the right and capacity to decide whether or not he will accept medical
treatment, even if a refusal may risk permanent injury to his health or even lead to premature death.
Furthermore, it matters not whether the reasons for the refusal were rational or irrational, unknown or
even non-existent. This is so, notwithstanding the very strong public interest in preserving the life and
health of all citizens. However, the presumption of capacity to decide, which stems from the fact that the
patient is an adult, is rebuttable. (2) An adult patient may be deprived of his capacity to decide by long-
term mental incapacity ... (3) If an adult patient did not have the capacity to decide at the time of the
purported refusal and still does not have that capacity, it is the duty of the doctors to treat him in
whatever way they consider, in the exercise of clinical judgment, to be in his best interests. (4) Doctors
faced with a refusal of consent have to give very careful and detailed consideration to what was the
patient's capacity to decide at the time when the decision was made. It may not be a case of capacity or
no capacity. It may be a case of reduced capacity. What matters is whether at that time the patient's
capacity was reduced below the level needed in the case of a refusal of that importance, for refusals can
vary in importance. Some may involve a risk to life or of irreparable damage to health. Others may
not."33
In short, persons with dementia should not be treated against their will, but
neither should life-saving treatment be withheld from them because their
condition has made them incapable of expressing their actual wishes. The "facts"
that contribute to a particular behavioural outcome in a patient with Alzheimer's
disease should always be subject to close analysis to ensure that interpretations
are not contaminated by unrealistic expectations of cognitive performance from a
diseased brain. Indeed, behaviours in patients with Alzheimer's disease may be
entirely the opposite of what might be expected from a normal adult. To
complicate matters further, the demented person may have windows of lucidity
when they may be judged competent to make decisions for themselves, or they
may at various times during the course of the disease, be able to make decisions
in some matters but not others.
In severe cases, losses associated with frontal lobe are often accompanied by
positive physical signs of a reflex nature and which remain unrecognised or
misinterpreted by observers. These include grasp reflexes, sucking responses, and
blepharospasm or involuntary prolonged eye closure following visual threat. In
cases where the patient is connected to life-supports, grasp reflexes whereby the
patient pulls out alimentation tubes are often misinterpreted as an indication that
he or she wishes to have them withdrawn. In fact, however, these patients are
incompetent, and their movements do not reflect cognitive awareness or
intellectual insight. In relation to persons with severe dementia, the decision to
withdraw life-sustaining treatment should not be made on the basis that the
patient "demonstrated" a wish to refuse further treatment, but in accordance with
the doctrine of best interests, taking into consideration the appropriateness of the
treatment and its therapeutic burdens and benefits.
Unconscionable Conduct and Undue Influence
As noted above, dementia manifests as a slowly progressive loss of cognitive
ability over many months to as many as 15 years, The disorder is characterised
by loss of cognitive and emotional control which are functions of the cerebral
cortex, the largest component of the human brain. Thus memory, language,
complicated motor and sensory tasks and visuospatial performance become
noticeably impaired. Most of the cerebral cortex of the frontal lobes, however, is
concerned with executive functions that underlie complex behaviours such as
judgment, reasoning and ability to change concepts. The manifestations of
dementia depend on intellectual and practical demands made of the individual.
Early in the clinical course, and sometimes for years, external demands may
imperceptibly reduce, so that decline in cognitive ability goes unrecognised. For
example, a businessman may have put in place such a robust support system of
colleagues that his cognitive losses remain hidden for remarkably long periods of
time.34 On the other hand, some individuals have such a large cognitive reserve
that much erosion is required before cognition is manifestly impaired. This effect
can be global or focal. For instance, an accountant may retain arithmetic skills
well beyond the time when all other cognitive abilities are noted to be impaired
by even the most casual observer.
As the population ages, challenges to validity of dispositions by those
diagnosed with dementia either at the time, or soon after of making a disposition
or will, became more frequent. A fairly common case scenario may provide a
basis for further discussion. It involves a businessman who, during the period of
two years after diagnosis of early dementia at 0.5 level, had given a business
colleague large sums of money, including some significant family assets over
which he had sole control. The colleague was aware of the businessman's
cognitive impairments, but "covered" for him in running the business until the
dementia became moderate to severe. The businessman's gifts were dispositions
inter vivos, but often a similar scenario arises when testamentary bounties to
friends, close neighbours and institutional and private carers of the demented
testator are challenged by disgruntled relatives. Can these dispositions be
invalidated on the ground that they were created by persons with dementia, and
thus subject to the doctrines of undue influence or unconscionable conduct?
All dispositions may be open to challenge on the ground that, due to "defective
faculties",35 the disposing or transacting party was incapable of understanding
their significance and purpose.36 This will often be the case in moderate to severe
dementia. However, in the example under discussion, the nature and effect of the
dispositions was understood. Whether the dementia constituted a relevant
"disorder of mind", either in the sense of impairment of "natural faculties",
"poisoning of affections" or "insane delusions" would very much depend on the
individual signs and symptoms. However, the competence challenge to the
validity of the businessman's gifts would turn on whether they would have been
made at all in the absence of dementia. At this point, the legal issue of causation
becomes a chicken and egg question, since but for the dementia he would have
required his colleague's help. Thus, but for the dementia the reason for the gifts
would not have arisen. Is it fair therefore to invalidate them on the ground that
dementia made the businessman vulnerable to undue influence or
unconscionable conduct by his colleague?
In the case of Bridgewater v Leahy,37 the majority of the High Court of
Australia reiterated the notion that undue influence and unconscionable conduct
"may be seen as a species of that genus of equitable intervention to refuse
enforcement of or to set aside transactions which, if allowed to stand, would
offend equity and good conscience". Since neither the standard of "equity" or
"good conscience" are defined, the courts have wide discretion in the
interpretation and application of these two doctrines.
In the case of the businessman, early dementia was the factual cause of his
decision to make gifts to his colleague, who was helping him to stay in business
for an extra two years. Yet, one suspects that the dispositions would be open to
challenge on the ground of unconscionability because, according to the majority
of the High Court of Australia, a donor's disposition may be invalidated even
though that person far from being "of weak mind", and was "perfectly competent
to understand what she or he was doing, had done, or proposed to do, if the court
finds that the intention [to execute the disposition] was produced as a result of
undue influence or unconscionable conduct".38
In other words, factors associated with the person's ability to form an
independent intention to dispose of property rather than his or her cognitive
capacity will be determinative of the validity of the disposition. Thus, the
businessman, possibly persuaded by his family, through a litigation guardian
could ask the court to set aside his dispositions of the family assets on the ground
of unconscionable conduct. He could plead that his early dementia placed him
under a serious disadvantage when he was deciding that his best interests were
served by staying on in business and making expensive gifts to a colleague rather
than by retiring, and that the colleague-recipient knew of his impaired
competence and took advantage of it. In Bridgewater v Leahy,39 the High Court of
Australia reaffirmed the general principle that the essence of unconscionable
conduct is the combined inability of the disposing party to consider his or her
best interests, and the unfair exploitation of this circumstance by another.40
Mason J noted that:
the disabling condition or circumstance is one which seriously affects the ability of the innocent party to
make a judgment as to his own best interests, when the other party knows or ought to know of the
existence of that condition or circumstance and of its effect on the innocent party.41
Would the action be successful? Historically, lack of intelligence,42 alcoholic
daze,43 infatuation of an elderly solicitor with a younger woman,44 and the
emotional dependence of an elderly but competent uncle upon his nephew45 have
all been considered sufficient disabling conditions for the purposes of
unconscionability. One of the symptoms of dementia is an impaired ability to
change concepts. It is arguable that once the businessman decided to remain in
the business, his medical condition prevented him from even contemplating any
other alternative. On this analysis, it could be said that his actions, including
making gifts to the colleague were subject to an "internal coercion". Yet, at the
time of the dispositions the businessman had early dementia, suggesting only a
slight cognitive impairment. This may not have involved conceptual rigidity, at
least with respect to the dispositions.
Almost certainly, by the time the case reached the courts, the businessman's
dementia would have been sufficiently advanced to render him an incompetent
witness. In a way, the position would be practically the same as that of a
challenged will. The difference between the colleague and beneficiaries under
challenge is that having received the gifts, he is in a better financial position than
they to defend the claim. The court would doubtless consider circumstantial
evidence to determine whether dementia constituted a "disabling condition" in
the context of his business activities. The determination would thus be based on
inferences drawn from general medical theory and evidence provided by
witnesses. The question of whether the colleague acted unfairly or took
unconscientious advantage of the opportunity created by the early dementia
would remain. The colleague enabled the businessman to continue to enjoy the
status, respect and prestige. These norms of community approval unfortunately
disappear once a diagnosis of dementia is made. Arguably, it was reasonable for
the businessman to decide that the price – in the form of gifts – was worth
paying for the help in retaining the community's esteem.
But then, the definition of what constitutes unconscionable conduct is vague
and open-ended. According to Lord Brightman unconscionable conduct is
"victimisation, which can consist either of the active extortion of a benefit or the
passive acceptance of a benefit in unconscionable circumstances."46 Any human
act as well as dynamics of any relationship can be interpreted negatively, so this
definition invites challenges to dispositions along a wide spectrum of psychiatric
and emotional conditions, as well as old age.47 Motives that activate human
conduct are intricate, and only rarely can be compartmentalised into purely
angelic and purely devilish. In a society where greed is regarded as virtue, there
are many who prey on the vulnerable and the lonely, including the demented.
The elderly with even mild dementia are not great company. If they are lucky,
their loving family and devoted friends will visit them regularly. But those who
live away from the family have to rely on strangers. Again, if they are lucky, non-
family carers, neighbours, new friends and partners may visit and help them out
of the goodness of their heart. Alternatively, these legal strangers (like some
family members) may do so for strictly mercenary purposes. However, if either
way the result is that donors or testators are made to feel special, respected and
cared for, then their dispositions - often by way of a codicil – should be analysed
from their perspective. Accordingly, whereas moderate and severe dementia
should always be regarded as a serious disadvantage and a disabling condition in
relation to the doctrine of unconscientious conduct, this might not necessarily be
the case with early dementia.
Although jurisprudential distinctions between unconscionable conduct and
undue influence are somewhat blurred, the characteristic feature of the doctrine
of undue influence is that a gift by a donor can be set aside even "where a donor
is perfectly competent to understand and intend what he or she did."48 This
doctrine instead focuses on decisional independence or freedom within the
relationship between two parties.49 In relation to dispositions inter vivos, the gist
of undue influence lies in the impairment of freedom and voluntary judgment of
the donor by the stronger party to the relationship.50 The court examines "the
quality of the donor's intention or the means by which it [the intention] was
produced,"51 in the sense of ascertaining that the intention was not subject to the
influence of a person in a position of dominance. Thus, the critical issue is not
decisional competence, but whether the donor executed the dispositions "as the
result of the free exercise of his independent will".52 Evidence of diminished
competence due to dementia may raise a presumption that the donee was in a
position to influence the donor's intentions. It could be claimed on behalf of the
businessman that, by definition, his early dementia made him a weaker party vis-
a-vis the colleague, and thus open to undue influence. The conclusion that the
businessman, like the uncle-transferor in Bridgewater v Leahy,53 was emotionally
and professionally dependant on the colleague may be well founded.
Nevertheless, as a ground for legal challenge, the case in which such conclusion
might be drawn sits uncomfortably with the principle that all of us. even the
elderly, have the right to dispose of property in any lawful manner we wish.
Conclusion
Major misjudgments may occur as a consequence of not recognising the
complexity of conditions that cause dementia together with the dynamic inter-
relationship of brain and environment. Considerable care must be taken in
making causal judgments based on personal interpretations of observed
behaviour. Law, with the help of medicine, must strive to understand behaviours
from the point of view of an affected person's brain. It must also recognise that
even a seriously impaired brain may be able to provide a suitable response to
current perceptions of external threat.
This area of interface between medicine and law can be expected to grow
substantially over the next few years as we witness a major increase in the
number of patients with Alzheimer's disease. Their families and carers are likely
to have unrealistic expectations of the ability of both medicine and law to resolve
the ethically and legally difficult questions that affect health and wealth, unless
members of the legal profession specifically pay attention to the growing medical
understanding of the nature and epistemology of cognitive disorders.
* Robert Helme, Former Director of the National Ageing Research Institute, North West Hospital,
Parkville, Victoria, Professorial Associate, Department of Medicine of the Royal Melbourne Hospital,
Chairman of the Parkville Campus of the North West Hospital Special Clinical School. Danuta
Mendeison, Senior Lecturer at the School of Law at Deakin University.
1 PS Appelbaum & TG Gutheil, Clinical Handbook of Psychiatry and the Law, 2nd edn, Williams &
Wilkins, Baltimore, 1991; S Crowe, "Forensic Neuropsychology" in I Freckelton & H Selby (eds),
Expert Evidence, Law Book Co, Sydney, 1993-....
2 JE Rein, "Ethics and the Questionably Competent Client: What the Model Rules Say and Don't Say"
(1998) 9 Stanford Law & Policy Rev 241 at 242.
3 Dementia usually leads to death in a severely debilitated, immobile state between four and fifteen
years after its onset: American Psychiatric Association, Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental
Disorders – DSM-IV-TR, American Psychiatric Association, Washington, DC, 2000.
4 Alzheimer's Type Dementia is the major cause of dementia (70 per cent), however, dementia can also
be produced by stroke, which damages patches of the brain and produces "multi-infarct" dementia.
Dementia may also be caused by AIDS, Huntington's Chorea, Parkinson's disease, or by alcohol-
induced brain damage.
5 AF Jorm & AS Henderson, Dementia in Australia, Department of Health and Family Services,
Australian Government Publishing Service, Canberra, 1998.
6 Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission, Human Rights and Mental Illness. Report of the
National Inquiry into the Human Rights of People with Mental Illness, Australian Government
Publishing Service, Canberra, 1993, at p510.
7 OECD Economic Surveys, 1998-1999, Australia, 1999.
8 Legislation providing for statutory agency under enduring powers of attorney for medical treatment
have been enacted in Victoria, South Australia, Northern Territory and South Australia: Medical
Treatment Act 1988 (Vic) s 6; Consent to Medical Treatment and Palliative Care Act 1995 (SA) ss 7
and 8; Natural Death Act 1988 (NT) s 4; Medical Treatment Act 1994 (ACT) ss 6 and 13, In New South
Wales and Tasmania, as well as in Victoria, Guardianship Acts provide for surrogate decisions with
respect to medical treatment to be made by especially appointed guardians on behalf of an
incompetent patient.
9 Mental Health Act 1983 (UK) Part VII; Wills Act 1936 (SA) s 7; Wills Act 1997 (Vic) s 21.
10 In criminal law, the rules of criminal insanity in McNaghten's Case (1843) 10 CI & F 200; 8 ER 718
provide the legal test for the plea of insanity defence. See D Mawson, "Specific defences to a criminal
charge: assessment for court" in R Bluglass & P Bowden (eds), Principles and Practice of Forensic
Psychiatry, Churchill Livingstone, Edinburgh, 1990, O Wood & GL Certoma, Succession. Commentary
and Materials, Law Book Co, Sydney, 1990.
11 The testator must be of sound mind at the time of signing the will: Marquess of Winchester's Case
(1598) 6 Co Rep 23a; Arthur v Bokenham (1708) 11 Mod Rep 148.
12 Greenwood v Greenwood (1790) 163 ER 930.
13 Harwood v Baker (1840) 13 ER 117.
14 LA Frolik, "The Biological Roots of the Undue Influence Doctrine: What's Love Got To Do With It?"
(1996) 57 U Pitt L Rev 841 at 849.
15 Banks v Goodfellow (1870) 5 QB 549; followed in Australia in In Will of Wilson (1897) 23 VLR 197;
Timbury v Coffee (1941) 66 CLR 277.
16 Banks v Goodfellow at 565.
17 Re Hodges (1988) 14 NSWLR 698 at 706 per Powell J; applied in Re Crichton, (unreported, Supreme
Court of New South Wales, Probate Division, 22 July 1994), and in Re Crooks (unreported, Supreme
Court of New South Wales, Probate Division, 4 December 1994).
18 See further J Devereux, "Competence to Make Decisions" in I Freckelton & K Petersen (eds),
Controversies in Health Law, Federation Press, Sydney, 1999.
19 HJ Bursztajn, HP Harding, TG Gutheil & A Brodsky, "Beyond Cognition: the Role of Disordered
Affective States in Impairing Competence to Consent to Treatment" (1991)
19 Bulletin of the American Academy of Psychiatry and Law 383.
20 In NSW, the court held that being a protected person under the Protected Estates Act 1983 (NSW) did
not of itself raise a conclusive presumption of incompetence to make a will: Perpetual Trustee Co Ltd
v Fairlie-Cunninghame (1993) 32 NSWLR 377. Likewise, in the American case of In re Estate of
Gentry, 573 P 2d 322 (Or Ct App 1978), it was held that the testator who was suffering from
schizophrenia and was under a guardianship was lucid, and therefore competent to execute and sign
a will.
21 JW de Furia Jr, in "Testamentary Gifts Resulting from Meretricious Relationships: Undue Influence or
Natural Beneficence?" (1989) 64 Notre Dame L Rev 200 at 200 noted that "freedom of testamentary
disposition has been described as one of the basic tenets of our social structure."
22 Nattrass v Nattrass [1999] WASC 77 (25 June 1999).
23 DS Fairweather & AJ Campbell, "Diagnostic Accuracy: The Effects of Multiple Aetiology and the
Degradation of Information in Old Age" (1991) 25 J Royal College Physicians of London 105.
24 Schloendorff v Society of New York Hospital, 105 NE 92 at 93 (1914).
25 Secretary, Department of Health & Community Services (NT) v JWB and SMB (Marion's case) (1992) 175
CLR 218.
26 Airedale NHS Trust v Bland [1993] AC 789 at 891.
27 Ibid, at 864 per Lord Goff of Chieveley. See also 826-7 (Hoffmann LJ).
28 A person's "affect" refers to his or her immediate emotional experience. In psychiatric practice,
subjective affective sensations such as pleasure, displeasure, irritation, etc, as reported by the patient
are equivalent to symptoms; the observed mood and affective display (anger, joy, sadness, hurt, etc)
serve as objective signs. The term "mood" refers to a more sustained and less flexible mental state
over a longer period of time. In depression, the affective sensations are often shallow, inadequate or
flattened: R Ketal, "Affect, Mood, Emotion and Feeling: Semantic Considerations" (1975) 132 Am J
Psychiatry 1215.
29 The rationale for the Commonwealth government, and hence our society, to underwrite the cost of
these medications is currently the cost-savings in delaying and thus shortening residential care.
30 Chappel v Hart (1998) 195 CLR 232.
31 Bennett v Minister of Community Welfare (1992) 176 CLR 408 at 412-413.
32 In re T (Refusal of Medical Treatment) [1992] 3 WLR 782.
33 Ibid, at 797.
34 It is said that this situation has pertained to more than one head of state in the contemporary world.
35 The High Court of Australia still refers to "defective faculties" in its judgments: see Bridgewater v
Leahy (1998) 194 CLR 457 at 475 per Gaudron, Gummow, Kirby JJ.
36 Gibbons v Wright (1954) 91 CLR 423 at 449; Blomley v Ryan (1956) 99 CLR 362 at 401.
37 Bridgewater v Leahy, op cit, fn 35, at 477 per Gaudron, Gummow, Kirby JJ.
38 Ibid, at 492 per Gaudron, Gummow, Kirby JJ.
39 Ibid.
40 "Whenever one party by reason of some condition or circumstance is placed at a special disadvantage
vis-a-vis another and unfair or unconscientious advantage is then taken of the opportunity thereby
created ...": Commercial Bank of Australia Ltd v
Amadio (1983) 151 CLR 447 at 462, per Mason J referring to Fuliagar J in Blomlev v Ryan (1956) 99 CLR
362 at 386.
41 Commercial Bank of Australia Ltd v Amadio (1983) 151 CLR 447 at 462.
42 Wilton v Farnworth (1948) 76 CLR 646.
43 Blomley v Ryan (1956) 99 CLR 362.
44 Louth v Diprose (1992) 175 CLR 621.
45 Bridgewater v Leahy, op cit, fn 35.
46 Hart v O'Connor [1985] AC 1000 at 1024. Cited with approval in Bridgewater v Leahy [1998] HCA 66;
(1998) 194 CLR 457 at 479-80, per Gaudron, Gummow, Kirby JJ.
47 In Bridgewater v Leahy, op cit, fn 35, the majority determined that testator's old age affected the quality
of his consent or assent to the transfers.
48 Bridgewater v Leahy, op cit, fn 35, at 479-80 Gaudron, Gummow, Kirby JJ, referring to Lord Eldon LC's
statements in Huguenin v Baseley (1807) 14 Ves Jun 273 at 299-300 33 ER 526 at 536.
49 In Mountain v Bennet (1787) 29 ER 1200 the judge instructed the jury to invalidate a will if they
believed that "the dominion or influence" of another prevented the exercise of independent discretion
by the testator.
50 Kinleside v Harrison (1818) 2 Phillim 449; (1818) 161 ER 1196 established the principle that certain
confidential relationships, such as member of the clergy and parishioner, parent and child, guardian
and ward, solicitor and client, as well as physician and patient raise a presumption of undue
influence. See also: Commercial Bank of Australia Ltd v Amadio (1983) 151 CLR 447 at 461, 474.
51 Bridgewater v Leahy, op cit, fn 35, at 475 per Gaudron, Gummow, Kirby JJ.
52 Ibid.
53 In Bridgewater v Leahy, op cit, fn 35, the owner of land entered into a contract to sell it to his nephew
for a price of $A696,811 and at the same time executed transfers of the land and a deed of forgiveness
for $A546,811 of the price. Although the Australian High Court acknowledged that at the time of
execution of the transfers, the owner was of sound mind, it set aside the deed of forgiveness of price
on sale of land.