15 Forensic Medicine: Issues in Causation
DAVID WELLS*
Introduction
While forensic pathology deals with examination of the dead, clinical forensic medicine deals with the
living. It is principally concerned with the provision of medical advice in the investigation of crimes and
other offences where medical knowledge and experience is essential to assist the legal process. Without
accurate documentation and expert interpretation of injuries by forensic clinicians who can also properly
evaluate medical history and circumstances, conclusions about how the injures occurred might be
flawed. Such conclusions will affect investigations of both criminal and civil trials.1
Injury interpretation is very much "bread and butter" work for the forensic
physician. Increasingly acknowledged as one of the special skills of this field of
medicine, it remains one of the most fascinating and yet contentious areas of
forensic medicine. There is often an unrealistic expectation, by the lay public, of
what the forensic practitioner can derive from observing a wound; a process
fuelled by a number of television dramas and detective novels.
The interpretation of injuries is a critical building block for forensic medical
practice as it requires a unique inter-dependence of observations and
interpretative skills. This is perhaps most clearly understood when reviewing
cases where an incorrect observation is made. This observation is recorded and a
false conclusion is reached by both the original observer and any subsequent
reviewer. What then occurs is that mistaken evidence is provided and a verdict is
reached not so much on the facts but rather on the basis of an error that occurred
in the initial phases of the investigation.
It is regrettable that there are often flaws in the way that medical practitioners
observe and interpret wounds. Why does this occur? Most medical assessments of
wounds have as their end-point the medical consequences and treatment of that
wound. In the Emergency Department, the practitioner's management is driven
by a need to explore the extent of the injury (with particular reference to possible
damage to underlying structures) and then treatment of that injury. The type of
wound and the forensic implications are secondary to the management of that
wound:
... clinicians do not think in terms of causation. The entire goal in the practice of medicine is treatment
prevention of death and minimization of morbidity. To this end, a diagnosis is essential but does not
address causation. (The clouded sensorium may be a result of a subdural haematoma. How the subdural
haematoma occurred is of no real concern in the therapy regimen).2
Limited knowledge of the definition of injuries creates further problems.
Frequently terminology is inaccurately applied (for instance, a "laceration" rather
than an "incised wound") or may be used interchangeably for similar injuries.
Whilst not affecting the management of the wound this may result in difficulties
in interpreting causation when there is a medico-legal consequence of the injury.
There are other fundamental differences between forensic practice and other
clinical practice that may further impact upon injury observation and
documentation.
In forensic practice the history of the incident may not be available from
the injured party, (eg the head injured individual), may be unreliable or
inaccessible (eg physically or sexually assaulted infants or intoxicated
subjects). The heavy reliance on the history of symptoms or events, in
clinical medical practice3 and its frequent absence in forensic medical
practice creates some unique challenges in this field.
The practitioner may be confronted with considerable limitations in the
desire to perform a thorough examination. Clinical forensic practice
includes a large clientele who may be abusive or threatening (eg
intoxicated or psychotic individuals), uncooperative (eg suspects in police
custody), agitated (eg assault victims), or confused (individuals with
intellectual disabilities). Further, there may be constraints in the physical
surrounds (eg poor lighting).
In many medical conditions the luxury of review may assist the diagnostic
process. In forensic practice, healing, surgical intervention or bandaging
may limit the value of this review. Nonetheless a review may be
necessary to observe the delayed appearance or evolution of injuries.
Practitioners limited knowledge of the medico-legal implications of a case
may also create problems. For instance, the accurate aging of injuries is
rarely possible; yet many practitioners, armed with factually incorrect
information from old texts and a misplaced "desire to help" will be
prepared to give an opinion regarding (say) the age of a bruise. In reality,
one can rarely be specific in timing these injuries.4 Practitioners often do
not appreciate how much weight may be placed on such an opinion; for
investigators it may influence a decision to charge, for a jury a verdict of
guilt.
Impartiality, a quality not tested in other clinical practice, is a critical
component to the provision of all forensic services. Investigators,
consciously or subconsciously, may bring considerable pressure to bear on
practitioners to provide an interpretation that would resolve an issue. This
is particularly so in cases where national security is threatened (eg
terrorist activities), serious serial offences (eg multiple murders) or when
public interest or anxiety is at a high level. These coercive forces may be
direct and forceful, or subtle and insidious. They may be particularly
strong where the practitioner has a formal relationship with the
investigating authority (eg an employee of that authority), when a close
personal relationship has developed between investigator and forensic
practitioner or when the individual roles of the investigator and
practitioner become blurred. Additionally, fairness may be compromised
when the practitioner develops an unconscious or a misplaced "desire to
help" the investigators.
A further component to all forensic services is the need for objectivity:
"Inappropriate expectation-laden observations can lead to observational
errors. Observational errors can lead to interpretive errors and
interpretive errors can lead to inferential errors".5
Without malicious intent, false information may be provided to the
practitioner. This information may influence the practitioner's approach to the
case, to the point that some observations are disregarded or incorrectly
interpreted and a false conclusion may be reached.
In this chapter, some of the specific issues relating to injury causation as they
apply to clinical forensic medicine will be explored, albeit briefly. By necessity,
such a review cannot be all-inclusive. Instead, focus will be directed to some of
the principles of injury interpretation, particularly as they apply to allegations of
sexual assault in both adults and children. For it is these fields that are frequently
dogged by misinformation and misinterpretation by both medical and legal
practitioners.
Injuries
There is a randomness to the distribution of assaultive injuries. This may result in
a wide range of sites and structures being damaged. Injury interpretation requires
a broad comprehension of anatomical, physiological and pathological principles.
These principles may be utilised to address questions of type and quantification
of force, timing of the injurious event or simply, the how, what and when.
Apparently minor injuries of the skin may result from the application of major
forces (eg, blunt abdominal trauma). The maxim – no injury on the outside does
not mean no injury on the inside – has implications for the medical assessment
and the forensic interpretation.
The depth of anatomical knowledge required is, therefore, directed at
describing the findings and interpreting the consequences. In forensic medical
practice, there are some sites that may warrant particular attention: scalp, face,
neck, forearms, hands and genito-anal region.
In the application of force to the body, there are a number of variables that
may affect injury production.
Type. Physical forces are the main factor applicable to forensic situations.
The physical agents involved may produce disruption of tissues (eg an
abrasion) or protein denaturation (eg thermal or electrical injuries).
Chemical or biological agents are far less common.
Amount, Accurate quantification of forces is not feasible in clinical
situations. In blunt trauma there is a close relationship between force and
resultive injury.
Duration. The same amount of blunt force delivered over a shorter period
will produce a greater transfer of kinetic energy and greater tissue
damage.
Agent. Exposure or contact with some weapons is more likely to produce
trauma than others.
Extent. Type of tissue involved. Issues of tissue vascularity, sensitivity to
hypoxia, ability to regenerate may also influence outcomes of trauma.
What are the injuries that may result from an assaultive action?
Certain actions inevitably produce injuries. However, not all assaultive actions
will result in injuries to the victim (Table 1). Further, there will be instances
where the assailant may sustain an injury whilst the "victim" has no visible site
of trauma (eg a punch or a bare-footed kick may be delivered with sufficient
force to fracture a finger or toe without the recipient sustaining an observable
injury).
There are multiple explanations for the absence of injuries in individuals
alleging physical assault. Some of these are specific to the complainant. These
may include an inaccurate or untruthful account or individual characteristics that
make the application of force less likely to result in an injury. For instance, a
young healthy person may show no stigmata of injury following the application
of relatively trivial trauma whilst an elderly person may demonstrate extensive
bruising. This in turn is due to lesser amounts of subcutaneous tissue and poorly
supported vasculature in the older age group. Similarly certain diseases (eg
clotting defects and a range of connective tissue disorders) or drugs (eg aspirin,
corticosteroids) may increase the propensity of "easy bruising."
The type of assault is also a critical element in the injury outcome. Certain
activities are inevitably associated with injury production (eg a stabbing) whereas
others (eg slapping, hair-pulling) are infrequently physically injurious. The
features of the tissue at the site of contact constitute a further factor. Hence blunt
trauma to the optical orbit where the skin is loose, relatively poorly supported,
highly vascular and overlying bone, is more likely to result in significant bruising
or laceration than at sites where these conditions are absent, such as the
abdominal wall or the palm of the hand. Clothing may also have some protective
effects.
Examination techniques and timing will affect the likelihood of injuries being
recognised, Poor quality examinations (particularly where examinations are
performed for the specific purpose of treatment rather than documentation) have
resulted in inadequate assessments. Blunt trauma may result in bruising that does
not become evident until after the examination. Similarly, healing, particularly of
minor injuries, may occur in the period between the assault and the examination.
Adult Sexual Assault
Considerable variations exist in the legal statutes prescribing what constitute
sexual offences. Many jurisdictions are specific as to the elements required to be
proven in the criminal offence of rape and these include:
Occurrence of sexual penetration; and
Absence of free agreement or consent.
Sexual penetration is also variously described but may include the introduction
(to any extent) of a penis into a bodily orifice or an object into the vagina or the
anus. Defences utilised by people accused of rape generally evolve around:
A denial that sexual penetration occurred; and
An acceptance that penetration occurred but with the complainant's
consent, or a belief that it was with the complainant's consent.
Consent or broadly "free agreement" can only be provided in the absence of
force, fear or coercion. Additionally, the subject must have the capacity to
consent to the act.
From the forensic perspective, it follows that the role of the doctor is to seek,
document and interpret information that may demonstrate whether:
The complainant was able to provide competent consent to the act;
Force was used during the alleged assault; and
Sexual penetration occurred.
The presence or absence of consent to the act are appropriately judged by the
court. There is no role for the medical practitioner in such decisions. Nonetheless
health practitioners may assist in the debate as to the complainant's ability to
provide competent consent.
Competence in this setting will revolve around issues of temporary or chronic
conditions that impact upon cognitive function. Drugs (including alcohol) and
head injury are the more common conditions encountered that may produce
short-term impairment. Psychiatric illnesses and intellectual disability tend to be
of a more chronic nature with an increased likelihood of prior recognition of
these conditions.
Conditions affecting cognitive function may have direct relevance to situations
in which injuries were sustained and hence, their interpretation. Alcohol and
other drugs affecting the central nervous system may impair balance and co-
ordination. This will increase the likelihood of "bumps and falls" resulting in a
range of blunt trauma particularly to bony prominences (eg shins, knees, elbows
and face).
Restraint or handling injuries (eg grip marks in the form of fingertip bruises)
about the upper arms and forearms may reflect "assistance" provided by others.
Alternatively, they may also be associated with forceful restraint for the purposes
of assault (eg arms or inner aspects of thighs).
Memory may be adversely affected by a range of acute and chronic conditions.
Here complainants may not be able to recall details of an incident including the
circumstances in which an injury was sustained. Alternatively, confabulation or a
misplaced desire to assist investigators may produce a range of inaccurate
responses.
Injuries (Non-genital). Consenting intercourse in its various guises rarely
results in bodily injuries. Notwithstanding this, anecdotal accounts abound of
individuals or couples who sustain injuries during coitus. These are usually in the
setting of experimentation (eg sado-masochistic activities), intoxication or
inappropriate settings (eg heights, surfaces etc). Relatively little is known about
injuries sustained in this fashion. There is almost certainly significant under-
reporting and non-publication, as the current literature amounts to little more
than single case reports.
There now exists a significant body of literature documenting injury findings
in adults reporting recent sexual assault. Some difficulties arise however in the
interpretation and comparison of these various publications because of the
considerable variations in study designs:
Age and gender. Pre-pubertal children, adults, females and males are
combined in some studies. The nature of the assault, the relationship to
the offender and the injury pattern are significantly different in these
groups.
Examination timing. Whilst some studies include only individuals
reporting assault within the previous twenty-four hours, others include all
reports (days or weeks after the assault). Healing or resolution of injuries
may have occurred in the latter group.
Injury definition. Even within this relatively specialised field, there exists
considerable variation in the classification and definition of wounds.
Some studies inappropriately include tenderness (as reported by the
complainant) or redness (a subjective assessment by the examiner) as
definitive indications of trauma.
Practitioner experience. Studies include examinations conducted by
inexperienced practitioners and others with considerable expertise in
gynaecology and forensic medicine.
Study design. Small numbers, retrospective studies, non-blinded design
and the absence of control groups are limiting factors in some
publications.
Bias. It is generally accepted that the majority of sexual assaults are not
reported. Hence those motivated to report may not reflect the
characteristics of the majority of victims of these offences. Motivating
factors may include serious injury (and in particular those requiring
treatment), ready access to quality services, and a range of secondary gain
issues.
Causation. The studies record injuries without attempting to relate them
to the allegations in each case. Hence the noted injuries have not
necessarily been sustained during the assault, but perhaps prior or
subsequent to the assault.
Notwithstanding these limitations it would be reasonable to conclude that
between one half and two-thirds of adult women reporting sexual assault are
found to have some form of non-genito-anal injury. The vast majority of these
being classified as a minor injury (small abrasions and bruises) not requiring
treatment. (Table 2) It follows that between one-third and half of women
reporting sexual assault do not have any objective evidence of the use of force
during the assault. The absence of injuries removes a very potent form of
corroboration of a non-consenting act.
Paucity of injuries was a major factor dictating the approach of police and the
courts, to allegations of sexual assault.
Allow her to make her statement to a police woman and then drive a horse and cart through it. It should
be borne in mind that except in the case of a very young child, the offence of rape is extremely unlikely
to have been committed against a woman who does not immediately show signs of extreme violence. If a
woman walks into a police station and complains of rape with no such signs of violence, she must be
closely interrogated.6
Here there was emphasis placed on the evidence of "resistance" because of the
requirement that the act be committed "against the will of the victim" rather than
without the consent.
However the extent and visual impact of the injuries incurred were probably the principal reason for a
conviction in this case. Photographs were shown of the victim with blackened eyes, swollen face and
nose, and missing clumps of hair.7
In the minds of many, the absence of consent still equates to the use of force
leading to an expectation that the complainant should have sustained assaultive
or defensive injuries.
Genito-anal Injuries. In sexual assaults, injuries to the anus or to the female
genitalia are generally the result of penetration or attempted penetration by a
blunt object. Clearly, blows or an assault with a sharp object may produce
wounds but these are generally readily identified by the history and the injury
pattern.
The post-pubertal hymen is an elastic membranous structure that is quite
capable of deforming or stretching without tearing. The anatomy of the hymen
shows considerable variation; the hymenal orifice may be of different shapes and
the margins may be irregular. Generally, the hymen is most prominent
posteriorly and may be deficient anteriorly. Consequently, most injuries to the
hymen are in the posterior segment.
It is to this author's dismay that considerable weight continues to be placed on
the appearance of the hymen in post pubertal girls and adult women. Statements
of virginity (or otherwise), virgo intacta or "intact hymen" regularly appear in
medical reports and yet the factual basis for such statements is, in nearly all
cases, absent.
Contrary to public belief, no definite criteria have ever been established for deciding whether a woman is
a virgin or not.8
Nearly a quarter of a century later there has been little advancement. What can
be safely concluded is that:
Acute injuries to the hymen (bruising, abrasions or lacerations) are
indicative of recent penetrating blunt trauma;
Acute injuries heal quickly (days or weeks) most frequently with no
residual evidence of injury;
Hymenal lacerations may remain as partial or complete transections.
However, the finding of a deficiency in the hymen should not necessarily
lead to a conclusion of past penetrating blunt trauma;
Post-pubertal females may have penile vaginal penetration (even on
multiple occasions) without sustaining any hymenal injuries; and
The finding of hymenal remnants (carunculae myrtiformes) is indicative
of repeated penetration or childbirth.
Few other conclusions can be safely drawn from hymenal examinations in the
post-pubertal. The act of penetration causes the soft tissues around the orifice to
stretch. The likelihood and extent of genito-anal injuries will thus depend upon:9
The state of the tissues – Injuries are more likely when the genital orifice
is small (eg, prepubertal girls) or has some co-existing pathology that
makes it more susceptible to trauma (eg, infections, inflammation,
neoplasia). The post-menopausal woman may be at higher risk of trauma
because of atrophic tissue changes and diminished lubrication.
The size and type of penetrating object. Clearly, very large objects have a
higher likelihood of producing trauma but there is the potential for
considerable distension of both orifices. Fisting or handballing (whereby
the hand is inserted into the vagina or anus) may or may not be
associated with injuries. Variation in penile size, is unlikely to be a factor
in injury production.
The amount of force used. This is undoubtedly one of the most significant
factors in injury production. However, the act of intercourse is generally
one of not inconsiderable vigour.
All of these factors need to be considered collectively in the assessment of
genito-anal trauma. These principles have practical significance in the assessment
of gynaecological trauma:
Generally, it is not possible to differentiate the injurious effects of
penetration with fingers, penis or a blunt, inanimate object. All are
examples of blunt objects, creating similar effects upon the anus or female
genitalia. Rarely will penetration with an inanimate object produce effects
that will assist in identifying the object.
Injuries to the genito-anal region may be asymptomatic. However, the
rich vasculature and nerve supply will usually result in injuries being
associated with symptoms of pain and bleeding. Less frequently,
symptoms may include difficulty or pain with the passage of urine or
faeces. The injuries producing symptoms are most commonly abrasions
and bruising and less commonly, lacerations.
Tenderness is a subjective phenomenon and whilst it may reflect tissue
trauma, it is not by itself, indicative of injury. Clumsily performed
examinations or anxiety about the examination procedure may invoke
complaints of discomfort or pain.
Inflammation (manifest by swelling, redness or discomfort) of either the
genitalia or the anus may be the result of recent intercourse but the
finding is not specific for recent penetration. Alternative causes of
inflammation include infections or chemical or other physical irritants.
The finding of blood in the genito-anal region requires from the examiner
a careful inspection as to the possible source. Whilst trauma may be the
and
causes
haematuria,
include
loss
menstrual
other
source,
haemorrhoidal bleeding.
Scientific analysis of fluid found about or within the vagina or anus is
required before any opinions can be provided as to its source.
Consensual sexual activities may result in genito-anal injuries in the post-
pubertal female. The frequency of injuries sustained in these
circumstances is unknown but some may be severe enough to warrant
treatment.
Child Sexual Assault
Background issues. There is no universal definition of child sexual assault with
many variations incorporating social, legal, behavioural or medical models.
Perhaps a useful starting point was that developed by the American Academy of
Paediatrics.10
Sexual abuse occurs when a child is engaged in sexual activities that the child cannot comprehend, for
which the child is developmental ly unprepared and cannot give consent, and/or that violate the law or
social taboos of society. The sexual activities may include all forms of oral-genital, genital, or anal
contact by or to the child, or non-touching abuses such as exhibitionism, voyeurism or using the child in
the production of pornography.
The medical assessment of children alleging that they have been sexually
assaulted remains one of the more problematic areas of paediatric practice. Few
practitioners have received formal teaching in the genito-anal anatomy of pre-
pubertal children. Even fewer have had training in the recognition of signs of
either acute or chronic trauma to that region.
In recent years, there have been considerable advances in the knowledge of
what constitute normal and abnormal genito-anal anatomy. This has been
primarily driven by some major cases (where the knowledge of the practitioners
was clearly found to be wanting), significant increases in the reporting of alleged
abuse, new technology and the development of medical training in this
specialised field.
The doctor must have an accurate knowledge of genital anatomy, experience in
performing gynaecological examinations and be able to apply the pathological
principles of trauma to the genital tract. It is perhaps worth reiterating the
comments of the Cleveland Inquiry on this matter:11
It was entirely proper for the two paediatricians to play their part in the identification of sexual abuse in
children referred to them, They were responsible for the care of their patients. Nonetheless they had a
responsibility to examine their own actions; to consider whether their practice was always correct and
whether it was in the best interests of the children and their patients. They are to be criticised for not
doing so and for the certainty and over-confidence with which they pursued the detection of sexual
abuse in children referred to them. They were not solely nor indeed principally responsible for the
subsequent management of the children concerned. However, the certainty of their findings in relation to
children diagnosed by them without prior complaint, posed particular problems for the Police and Social
Services.
Visualisation and documentation of children's genito-anal regions has
historically been a difficult and contentious issue. Previously naked eye, hand-
held lenses or oto/ophthalmoscopes, Glaister's rods or catheters were utilised.
Problems encountered with these methods include pain, limited angle of view,
short focal length and unsatisfactory documentation. These factors, combined
with the inappropriateness or inability to review the child, resulted in the
development and application of newer technology.
Colposcopy was first utilised by Hinselmann in Germany in 1924. Struck by
the limitations of naked eye examination in the diagnosis of early cervical cancer,
he constructed the first colposcope using Leitz lenses mounted on a pile of books
for his first colposcopic examination.12
In the early 1980s William Teixeira,13 a Brazilian medical examiner,
commenced utilising the colposcope to clarify what he called dubious diagnoses
made on gross unaided visualisation. It was not until the mid 1980s that
Woodling and Heger14 at UCLA commenced systematic use of the colposcope in
evaluating children who had allegedly been sexually abused.
Colposcopic documentation is obtained through either a 35 mm camera or
video attachment. Colposcopic examination has specific benefits in that it allows
for magnification, illumination and photo documentation. Recorded findings in
the form of photographs or videotapes may be used for case presentation, peer
review, teaching and research activities.
There is no doubt that colposcopic photo documentation has greatly
contributed to the body of scientific knowledge of genital and anal findings in
both abused and non-abused children.15
Genital findings in children are difficult to interpret and is not within the
expertise of most medical practitioners. Whilst acute trauma may be readily
recognised, other findings remain much more problematic. What is normal?
Could it be accidental? What is the age of injury?
Current information allows us to reasonably conclude that:
The position in which the child is examined is critical to the interpretation
of observations. When hymenal abnormalities are observed in the dorsal
position, the child should be re-examined in the knee-chest position to
exclude gravitational effects on the tissues.
A genital examination with normal findings does not exclude some forms
of sexual contact. In the majority of cases, the medical examination will
neither confirm nor refute an allegation of sexual assault.16 Certain
actions are unlikely to produce injuries (eg oro-genital contact) whilst
others, (eg penetration of the anus or penetration of the labia but not the
hymen) may not necessarily produce injuries. Again, the amount of force
will be a central issue.17 Other explanations for the absence of physical
signs may include the absence of penetration18 and the healing of minor
injuries19 (particularly as many disclosures are delayed for lengthy
periods after the alleged assault).20
Falls (eg astride an object) may produce genital injuries. Generally, these
are confined to the labia and surrounding skin.21 It is difficult to conceive
of a situation where either the hymen or the vagina could be injured
without evidence of trauma to the external genitalia.
There is no evidence that a range of sporting activities produce hymenal
disruption but this issue has not been the subject of specific study.
There is considerable variation in the shape of the hymen. The
prepubertal hymen is generally thin and relatively inelastic. In this age
group, penetration into the vagina may be associated with tearing of the
hymenal tissue. At a later time, this tearing may be manifest by a deep
notching of the hymenal margin or by scarring of the hymenal tissue.
Evaluation of the post-menarchal hymen warrants some specific
comments. Oestrogen produces dramatic changes to the hymen at the
time of puberty causing it to become more elastic, distensible, thick and
irregular.22 These features mean that the tissue is less likely to be damaged
during penetration. It also means that the ability to reach a conclusion
regarding past penetration is very limited as notching or even scarring or
transections may become obscured in the physical changes to this
structure.
Relatively little is known about what constitutes normal variations of the peri-
and post- menarchal hymen. One study23 of 300 non-abused adolescent girls with
a mean age of 18 found:
In the subgroup of 100 sexually active girls, 81 per cent had hymenal
clefts compared to 11 per cent of non-sexually active tampon users and 5
per cent of non-sexually active pad users.
37 per cent of sexually active girls had narrowing of the hymenal rim to
<1mm compared with 0 per cent (of 200 girls) who were not sexually
active.
Caution should be used in interpreting the results of this single study and, in
particular, whether narrowing is a particularly sensitive marker in this group and
further, the reliability of self-identification of past sexual activity.24
In another study (204 girls with a mean age of 13 years), the authors concluded
that:25
Most of the subjects had a hymen of normal appearance after an episode
of penetration of the vagina with a penis.
Previous consensual sexual activity did not predict an abnormal finding.
Repeated penetration over a long period of time may result in attenuation
and loss of hymenal tissue. The findings of hymenal scarring or the
absence of hymenal tissue posteriorly is highly suggestive of blunt,
penetrating trauma.
Empirical studies have not found evidence of congenital absence of the
hymen.
Hymenal orifice measurements are of little diagnostic value in the
assessment of penetrating trauma. Orifice size varies with the age,
position and relaxation of the child and there is limited consensus
regarding measurement interpretation.
There are a considerable number of findings that, when seen in isolation,
may be considered as being non-specific or, at best, suggestive but not
diagnostic of anal penetration.26 These findings include peri-anal
inflammation, fissures, skin tags and reflex anal dilatation.27 Reflex anal
dilatation is a highly variable finding and cannot be considered diagnostic
of anal penetration.
The findings of anal dilatation at postmortem is not a marker for prior
penetration. Postmortem perianal findings should be interpreted with
caution.28
Lichen sclerosus may produce findings that could be misinterpreted as
being the result of genito-anal trauma.29
Genital trauma in young boys. Recent debate has centred around the
interpretation of genital findings in prepubescent females and anal findings in
both sexes. This has been appropriate given the controversy that certain cases
have produced and the desire to develop a consensus of opinion in these fields.
Relatively neglected in the debate has been the issue of genital trauma to male
children.
Despite their external position, the genitalia of the male child should be
relatively immune from injury. Mobility of the organs, the anatomical protection
offered by buttocks and thighs and the likelihood of covering by clothing
(especially a nappy), shelters the organs from the majority of hazards to which
this age group are exposed. Nonetheless, accidental trauma to the male genitalia
is a well recognised, though infrequent, event.
Trauma to the male genitalia may result from the number of sources. In the
adult male, the injury pattern ranges from the predictable to the bizarre;
seemingly, the only limiting factor being the imagination of the perpetrator.
Injuries produced by a range of household items such as vacuum cleaners, blades,
drills and guns have been well-documented.30 Additionally, sexual activity in its
various guises has associated hazards with more than 70 per cent of penile
injuries reportedly occurring during some form of sexual activity.31 Traumatic
fractures of the penis during intercourse, bites and bizarre entrapments are
anecdotal in most Emergency Departments.
In young children, however, access to causative agents (either by physical
restriction or prescribed by law) reduces the range of injurious agents. However,
genital trauma in young children may be produced in a diversity of situations.
Iatrogenic – Although well described, the frequency of iatrogenic genital
injuries appears to have reduced in recent years. Arguably, this is due to a lower
incidence of circumcisions and improved surgical techniques. However, there
may be some communities where this problem remains current.32
Blunt Trauma – Vehicular collisions and straddle falls may produce a range of
blunt genital injuries. Additionally, such trauma may be associated with vascular
and urethral damage. Other forms of blunt trauma may be the result of blows,
pulling, pinching or crushing, producing abrasions, lacerations or bruising to the
genitalia. A carefully obtained history from the child and eye witnesses, an
assessment of the injury pattern, relevant medical investigations and an
examination of the scene will usually assist in the analysis of that situation.33
Bites – The finding of a bite injury to the genitalia should be an immediate
prompt for a thorough investigation. Any human bite sufficient to leave objective
signs of trauma should be a clear indication of assaultive behaviour. Animal bites
to male genitalia are rare.
Incarceration – As an appendage, the male genitalia has the potential to be
entrapped between objects or be the object of a tourniquet. In children, the
ubiquitous zipper remains a potential source of injury. The child may present
with his genitalia entrapped in the zipper or, alternatively, injury secondary to
the entrapment may be seen. Generally, the child provides a good history of the
event and the injury is usually limited to mild abrasions. Cases of strangulation
by hairs, hidden threads or even a wrench have also been documented.34
Burns – Despite the relatively high incidence of burns in childhood, isolated
burns of the genitalia appear to be a most unusual event. Whilst there is a
considerable range of potential causative agents, the history and the burn pattern
will usually assist in defining the circumstances of the injury.
Incised wounds – Incised wounds of the genitalia appear to be most unusual.
Self-inflicted incised wounds are usually associated with a troubled adolescent
and any other presentation demands a thorough investigation.
Non-accidental trauma to the male genitalia may be due to either sexual or
physical forms of abuse. Interestingly, non-accidental trauma to the female
genitalia is generally categorised as sexual abuse. This demarcation between
sexually and physically assaultive behaviour raises a number of issues for
medical practitioners and the criminal justice system.
Unless the circumstances of the assault are unequivocal, the distinction
between physically or sexually assaultive behaviour may be difficult. It has been
suggested that girls are more likely to interpret assaultive acts involving their
genitalia as being sexually motivated.35 Arguably, such an interpretation is just as
likely to be made by the investigators and prosecutors of such offences. Sexually
assaultive behaviour involving young boys' genitalia usually consists of an
assailant handling, licking or sucking the genitalia; actions that are infrequently
associated with the production of injuries.36
From a case management perspective, the distinction between sexually or non-
sexually motivated assault may be of significant importance.37 Medically, issues
of disease transmission and counselling require addressing. For law enforcement
agencies, knowledge of the causative circumstances may be critical to decisions of
charging and penalties.
TABLE 1:
Assaultive Injury Patterns38
Action
Possible Injuries
Site
• Bite marks: bruising, abrasions.
NECK
BITE
• Suction type petechial bruising.
BREASTS
• Bite marks, abrasions/lacerations to nipples.
SCALP
• Bruising, (including haematomas), lacerations.
• Fractures (zygoma, jaw, nose).
• Dental trauma.
FACE
• Intra-oral bruises, abrasions, frenulum
damage.
• Facial bruises-slap marks.
• Periorbital haematomas.
• Subconjunctival haemorrhage.
EYES
• Hyphaemas.
• Traumatic mydriasis.
BLOWS
• Tympanic membrane perforation (usually
slapping).
EARS
• Pinna bruises/lacerations.
• Post auricular bruises.
• Laryngeal skeleton trauma.
NECK
• Voice changes (hoarseness, dysphonia), and
dysphagia.
• Knuckle abrasions, (punching) bruising,
HANDS
lacerations or fractures.
LIMBS
• Bruises, abrasions, lacerations & fracture.
TRUNK
• Bruises, abrasions, fractures (especially ribs).
• Circular burns between 5 mm and 15mm in
BURNS -
size, on any part of the body.
CIGARETTE BURNS
• Partial or full thickness. Flame, scald, contact.
Action
Possible Injuries
Site
• Bruising (especially on medial and lateral aspects of
forearms, hands), "warding off" type injuries.
LIMBS
• Incised wounds (knife, bottle).
• Lacerations and fractures (blunt implements).
DEFENSIVE
• Incised wounds to palms and web space (grasping
RESPONSES
sharp weapon).
• Incised wounds and bruises to dorsum (deflecting
HANDS
blows).
• Nail damage (may also occur in counter-assault, eg
scratching).
DRAGGING LIMBS /
• Abrasions and bruises on exposed skin surfaces.
Embedded foreign material.
TRUNK
• Abrasions and bruising especially to bony
FALLS
LIMBS
prominences; elbows, knees and heel of hands,
lacerations, fractures.
FINGERNAIL
• Linear scratch abrasions to any part of body.
SCRATCHES
• Linear scratch abrasions due to contact with
vegetation.
FLIGHT
LIMBS
• Bruises from contact with other objects, falls.
• Abrasions and bruises on soles.
• Bruising.
EARS
• Trauma secondary to earring contact/loss.
GRASPING
• Fingertip bruises, especially to medial aspect of upper
LIMBS
arms and forearms and medial thighs.
HAIR
• Hair follicle haematomas, bald patches, tenderness.
PULLING
• Puncture site over the course of a vein.
INJECTIONS UPPER
LIMBS
• Bruising.
Action
Possible Injuries
Site
• Ligature marks or imprint bruising
(necklace, clothing).
LIGATURE / MANUAL
• Fingertip bruises, abrasions (due to
NECK
COMPRESSION
fingernails).
• Facial petechiae, intra-oral petechiae,
conjunctival haemorrhages.
Occasionally,
MOUTH
PENETRATION
• Pharyngeal bruising, palate bruising,
frenulum trauma.
• Ligature marks (wrists and ankles),
LIMBS
RESTRAINT
fingertip bruising.
SQUEEZING /
BREASTS
• Bruising.
PINCHING
• Linear, curved or looped bruising,
TRUNK/
WHIPPING WITH
abrasions.
LIMBS
ROPE /CORD
• Tramtrack bruises.
TABLE 2:
Adult Female Sexual Assault Studies
Lenahan41 Cartwright42
Beh39
Bowyer40
No
16-48 (mean
4-66
>10
>15
Age
25)
Extragenital
35%
40%
76%
82%
injuries
6% naked eye
Genito-anal
-
16%
27%
53%
injuries
colposcopy
Rambow44
Slaughter43
Tintinalli5
Wells46
No
11-85 (mean
13-78
>16
>16
Age
24)
Extragenital
32%
50%
57%
64%
injuries
68%
Genito-anal
10%
19%
27%
(colposcopy)
injuries
* The Head of Clinical Forensic Medicine at the Victorian Institute of Forensic Medicine and Honorary
Associate Professor of Forensic Medicine at Monash University.
1 D Wells, M El-Nageh, B Linehan, S Cordner & H McKelvie, Ethical Practice in Laboratory & Medicine
& Forensic Pathology, WHO Regional Publications, Eastern Mediterranean Series, Egypt, 1999, p41.
2 I Root, "Head Injuries from Short Distance Falls" (1992) 13(1) Am J Forensic Med Pathol 85.
3 G Sandler, "The Importance of the History in the Medical Clinic and the Costs of Unnecessary Tests"
(1980) 100 Am Heart J 928.
4 N Langlois & G Gresham, "The Ageing of Bruises: A Review and Study of the Colour Changes With
Time" (1991) 50 Forensic Science International 227.
5 J Nordby, "Can We Believe What We See, If We See What We Believe? Expert Disagreement" (1992)
37(4) Journal of Forensic Sciences 1115.
6 Anon, "Police Review 1975" in T Williamson, "Police Investigations – Separating the False and
Genuine" (1996) 36(2) Med Sci Law 135.
7 A Edwards & M Heenan, "Rape Trials in Victoria: Gender, Socio-cultural Factors and Justice" (1994) 27
ANZ J Criminol 213.
8 R Underhill & J Dewhurst, "The Doctor Cannot Always Tell – Medical Examination of the Intact
Hymen" (Feb 1978) 18 Lancet 375.
9 D Wells, E Ogden & S Young, "Child Abuse" in I Freckelton & H Selby, Expert Evidence: Law, Practice
and Procedure, 2nd edn, Law Book Co, Sydney, 2002.
10 American Academy of Paediatrics, "Guidelines for the Evaluation of Sexual Abuse of Children: Subject
Review"(1999) 103(1) Paediatrics 186.
11 Report of the Inquiry into Child Abuse in Cleveland 1987, HMSO, 1988.
12 E Burghardt, Colposcopy Cervical Pathology, Teorg Thieme Verlag, Stuttgart, 1984.
13 W Teixeira, "Hymenal Colposcopic Examination in Sexual Offences" (1981) 2 Am J Forensic Med
Pathology 209.
14 B Woodling & A Heger, "The Use of the Colposcope in the Diagnosis of Sexual Abuse in the Paediatric
Age Group" (1986) 10 Child Abuse & Neglect 11.
15 J McCann, "Use of the Colposcope in Childhood Sexual Abuse Examinations" (1990) 37(4) Pediatric
Clinics of North America 863; D Muram, K Arheart & S Jennings, "Diagnostic Accuracy of
Colposcopic Photographs in Child Sexual Abuse Evaluations" (1999) 12 J Pediatr Adolesc Gynecol 58;
C Hobbs, J Wynne, A Thomas, "Colposcopic Genital Findings in Prepubertal Girls Assessed for
Sexual Abuse" (1995) 76 Archives of Disease in Childhood 465; M Finkel, "Technical Conduct of the
Child Sexual Abuse Medical Examination" (1998) 22(6) Child Abuse & Neglect 555.
16 D Moran, "Child Sexual Abuse: Relationship between Sexual Acts and Genital Findings" (1989) 13 Child
Abuse and Neglect 211; D Moran, "Child Sexual Abuse – Genital Findings in Prepubertal Girls" (1989)
160 Am J Obstet Gynaecol 328.
17 JA Adams & S Knudson, "Genital Findings in Adolescent Girls Referred for Suspected Sexual Abuse"
(1996) 15 Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med 850.
18 K Edgarth, G Von Krogh & K Ormistad, "Adolescent girls investigated for sexual abuse: history,
physical findings and legal outcome" (1999) 104 Forensic Sci Int 1-15.
19 D Moran & M Laufer, "Limitations of the Medical Evaluation for Child Sexual Abuse" (1999) 44(12) J
Reprod Med 993.
20 D Smith, E Letourneau, B Saunders, D Kilpatrick & H Resnick, "Delay in Disclosure of Childhood Rape:
Results from a National Survey" (2000) 24(2) Child Abuse & Neglect 273.
21 S Pokorny, W Pokorny & W Kramer, "Acute Genital Injury in the Prepubertal Girl" (1992) 166 Am J
Obstet Gynecol 1461.
22 S Pokorny, J Murphy & M Preminger, "Circumferential Hymen Elasticity: A Marker of Physiological
Maturity" (1998) 43 J Reprod Med 943.
23 J Emans, E Woods, E Allred & E Grace, "Hymenal Findings in Adolescent Women, Impact of Tampon
Use and Consensual Sexual Activity" (1994) 125 J Paediatrics 153.
24 F Goodyear-Smith & T Laidlaw, "Can Tampon Use Cause Hymen Changes in Girls Who have not had
Sexual Intercourse? A Review of the Literature" (1998) 94 For Sci Int 147.
25 J Adams & S Knudson, "Genital Findings in Adolescent Girls Referred for Suspected Sexual Abuse"
(1996) 150 Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med 850.
26 D Muram, "Anal and Perianal Abnormalities Seen in Prepubertal Victims of Abuse" (1989) 161 Am J
Obstet Gynecol 278.
27 J McCann, M Simon, J Voris et al, "Perianal Findings in Prepubertal Children Selected for Nonabuse: A
Descriptive Study" (1989) 13 Child Abuse Negl 179.
28 J McCann, D Reay, J Siebert, B Stephens & S Wirtz, "Postmortem Perianal Findings in Children" (1996)
17(4) Am J Forensic Med Pathol 289.
29 S Young, D Wells & E Ogden, "Lichen Sclerosis, Genital trauma and child sexual abuse" (1993) 22(5)
Australian Family Physician 729-33; R Thomas, C Ridley, D McGibbon & M Black, "Anogenital
Lichen Sclerosis in Women" (1996) 89 J R Soc Med 694; P Wood & T Bevan, "Child Sexual Abuse
Enquiries and Unrecognised Vulval Licen Sclerosus et Atrophicus" (1999) 319 BMJ 899.
30 A Cass, P Gleich & C Smith, "Male Genital Injuries from External Trauma" (1985) 57 Br J Urol 467.
31 J Prior, J Hill & D Packham, "Penile Injuries with Particular Reference to Injury to the Erectile Tissue"
(1981) 53 Br J Urol 42.
32 ER Thatt, M Wagh & NI Kulkarni, "Identical Unusual Subtotal Amputation in Children: a Report of
Four Cases" (1993) 46(6) Br J Plast Surg 535.
33 D Wells, "Genital Trauma in Young Boys" (1996) 3 J Clin For Med 129.
34 V Vahasarja, P Hellstrom, W Serlo & M Kontturi, "Treatment of Penile Incarceration by the String
Method: Two Case Reports" (1993) 149 J Urol 372.
35 D Finkelhor & J Wolak, "Non Sexual Assaults to the Genitals in the Youth Population" (1995) 274 JAMA
1692.
36 D Wells, "Genital Trauma in Young Boys" (1996) 3 J Clin For Med 129.
37 W Holmes & G Slap, "Sexual Abuse of Boys: Definition, Prevalence, Correlates, Sequelae and
Management" (1998) 280(21) JAMA 1855.
38 (Modified from) A Welborn, Adult Sexual Assault, Monash University, Victoria, 2000.
39 PSL Beh, "Rape in Hong Kong: an Overview of Current Knowledge" (1998) 5 J Clin For Med 124.
40 L Bowyer & ME Dalton, "Female Victims of Rape and their Genital Injuries" (1997)
104 Br J Obstet Gynaecol 617.
41 L Lenahan, A Ernst & B Johnson, "Colposcopy in Evaluation of the Adult Sexual Assault Victim" (1998)
16 Am J Emerg Med 183.
42 PS Cartwright & the Sexual Assault Study Group, "Factors that Correlate with Injury Sustained by
Survivors of Sexual Assault" (1987) 70 Obstet Gynecol 144.
43 L Slaughter, CRV Brown, MN Crowley & R Peck, "Patterns of Genital Injury in Female Sexual Assault
Victims" (1997) 176 Am J Obstet Gynecol 609.
44 B Rambow, C Adkinson, TH Frost & GF Peterson, "Female Sexual Assault: Medical and Legal
Implications" (1992) 21(6) Annals of Emergency Medicine 727.
45 JE Tintinalli & M Hoelzer, "Clinical Findings and Legal Resolution in Sexual Assault" (1985) 14 Annals
of Emergency Medicine 447.
46 D Wells & S Young, "Circumstances and Findings in Women Alleging Rape", Proceedings, International
Conference on Emergency Medicine, Sydney, 1996.