8 Loss of Chance
HAROLD LUNTZ*
McHUGH J: It might be that it is really a loss of chance case, is it not, rather than...
KIRBY J: At last we might ...
MR BRERETON: Yes, it might be, your Honour. It has never been put on that basis.
McHUGH J: No, I know. That seems to me probably the correct basis for putting that sort of case.
MR BRERETON: But, essentially, what we are now faced with is something completely different from
what was at trial and what was in the Court of Appeal.
KIRBY J: One day we will get a good loss of chance case.
MR BRERETON: I will see if I can find one, your Honour.1
Introduction
So far the High Court of Australia has not been faced with a clear-cut case of loss
of chance in a medical negligence appeal. Special leave to appeal was refused in
the case from which the above extract is taken, mainly because the issue had not
been litigated below and the necessary findings of fact had not been made. Cases
will seldom be litigated on the basis of loss of a chance, because both plaintiff and
defendant are hopeful of complete victory.4 Nevertheless, experience in other
jurisdictions suggests that Kirby J is right in saying that one day the court will
have an opportunity to consider the issue.
The doctrine has been described in the Supreme Court of Canada as suggesting
that "plaintiffs may be compensated where their only loss is the loss of a chance
at a favourable opportunity or of a chance of avoiding a detrimental event."3 A
possible scenario might be as follows:
A patient presents for treatment with symptoms that should alert a medical practitioner to the possibility
of cancer. The practitioner negligently fails to recognise the symptoms and to recommend tests that could
confirm the presence of cancer. Six months later the patient is found to be suffering from cancer. Its state
of growth and the earlier symptoms indicate that it was already present when the earlier examination
was conducted. If the practitioner had then recommended the appropriate tests, the cancer would
probably have been detected and treated. Had it then been treated, the patient would have had a 40 per
cent chance of survival for another five years. Now that six months have elapsed without treatment, the
chances of the patient's survival for five years are only 10 per cent.4
In such a case, assuming that there is a contract between the medical
practitioner and the patient, as there would ordinarily be even if no money
passed directly from the patient to the doctor,5 the patient would be entitled to
nominal damages at least for the breach of the implied term requiring the
exercise of reasonable care and skill. If there is no contract, nominal damages
cannot be awarded, since any action would be in the tort of negligence and
damage is the gist of the action. Beyond that, disputed territory lies.6
On one view, the patient, if able to prove on a balance of probabilities that he
or she suffered pain during the six months when the cancer was undetected,
which would have been alleviated by treatment if the medical practitioner had
not been negligent, may recover damages to compensate for that pain. Similarly,
damages may be awarded for loss of earning capacity or any of the other heads
of damage during that period if it is proved on a balance of probabilities that the
patient suffered them and would not have if the medical practitioner had not
been negligent. These losses may extend beyond the six months when the cancer
was undetected in so far as it can be shown by the patient on a balance of
probabilities that they have been, and will be, greater than if treatment had been
given at the earlier stage. But no damages may be awarded for the loss of the
chance of survival for five years, since on the balance of probabilities (60:40) the
patient would not have survived for five years even if there had been no
negligence on the part of the medical practitioner.
The analysis which is preferred in this chapter is that whether or not there was
a contract between the patient and the medical practitioner, the patient would be
entitled to compensatory damages for any pain and suffering, loss of earning
capacity, etc during the six months when the cancer was undetected, subject to a
discount for the chances that the pain and suffering and other losses would not in
any event have been able to be alleviated.7 Similarly, damages may be awarded
for the chance that the patient will in the future suffer pain, loss of earning
capacity and other losses, subject to a reduction for the chance that this would
have occurred even if there had been no negligence on the part of the doctor.8 In
so far as there is uncertainty as to the extent to which the patient's underlying
cancer would have brought the patient to a state similar to that which has thus
far occurred and that is predicted to occur in the future, an evidentiary onus rests
on the defendant to disentangle the causes,9 though the ultimate onus rests on the
plaintiff to satisfy the court that some damages should be awarded.10 In other
words, this chapter adopts the thesis of JH King Jr:
Loss of chance should be compensable even if the chance is not better than even, and it should be
recognized and valued as such rather than as an all-or-nothing proposition. Any other rule fails to satisfy
the goals of tort law.11
Leaving aside medical negligence for the moment, the thesis may be illustrated
by the decision of the House of Lords in the Scottish case of McGhee v National
Coal Board.12 Here the pursuer sought damages from his employer for dermatitis.
He had been required to work in hot and dusty conditions in the defender's brick
kilns. By the time the case reached the House of Lords it was accepted that this in
itself was not negligent on the part of the defender. However, in breach of the
duty of care owed to him, the defender had failed to provide showers with which
he could wash off the accumulated dust at the end of his shifts. Accordingly, the
dust had clung to him as he cycled home. Medical evidence was that this
increased the risk of his developing dermatitis from the dust. But it was not
known how this occurred. It could not be shown that more probably than not, he
would not have developed the dermatitis if he had showered.
The lower courts held that the pursuer's action had to fail. The House of Lords
unanimously upheld his appeal. The case was seen as either entitling the pursuer
to all his damages for dermatitis or to none. There has been much subsequent
debate as to whether their Lordships reversed the onus of proof or merely took a
robust view in order to draw an inference of causation.13 It is suggested that the
case should have been seen as one involving loss of a chance: the failure to
provide showers deprived the pursuer of the chance of avoiding the dermatitis,
which was undoubtedly caused by the brick dust and not by any other factor.
This was not a case such as where a plaintiff is negligently exposed to asbestos
and also smokes and it is not known whether the lung cancer from which the
plaintiff suffers was caused by the one or the other or the cumulative effect of
both. There the plaintiff must prove on a balance of probabilities that the asbestos
at least materially contributed to the cancer.14 The plaintiff must prove according
to the ordinary standard of proof the fact of the loss and its source.15
It is not because the defender's negligence in McGhee consisted of an omission
that the issue there should have been seen as one of valuation and not causation.
Omissions may also be causes. As Mason J pointed out, a "gardener's failure to
water the flowers may properly be regarded as a material cause of their dying for
want of water, when it is his duty to water them".16 The difficulty for the pursuer
in McGhee was that the medical evidence would not sustain a conclusion that it
was more likely than not in his case that the provision of showers would have
prevented the dermatitis. The omission could not therefore in his case be said to
have caused the harm itself. But if we recognise as a loss that he sustained the
fact that he was deprived of the chance of avoiding the dermatitis, this loss was
proved. It should then have become a matter of valuing that chance. If the chance
was only 40 per cent, he should have received 40 per cent of the damages he
ultimately received, since there was a 60 per cent chance that he would have
developed dermatitis even if the employer had provided showers and so not been
negligent. The court should not have been faced with the choice of awarding him
100 per cent of his damages or none at all.17 Even if it was more probable than
not that the provision of showers would have prevented the dermatitis, he should
not have been awarded 100 per cent of his damages, because there was also a
chance that he would still have incurred the dermatitis and such a chance should
have been taken into account in the valuation of his loss.18
This chapter explores the case law in order to see whether it is possible to
arrive at this solution in a medical negligence context. In other words, where
there is little doubt that a plaintiff's physical or mental condition was caused by
some pre-existing condition and the present state might have been prevented or
alleviated in the absence of negligence on the part of a medical practitioner, may
the failure to exercise reasonable care to prevent or alleviate the condition be
itself treated as a loss to the plaintiff, damages for which may be assessed on the
basis of the chances of success or alleviation? It is true that in all cases where the
defendant is under a duty of care to act positively to prevent harm from another
source, the issue of causation can be recast as one of valuation of a chance. For
instance, someone who slipped and fell in a shop would be able to argue that the
failure on the part of the shop to take care to provide a system for the removal of
such substances deprived him or her of the chance of not slipping. This is
contrary to the present law, which requires the plaintiff to prove on a balance of
probabilities that such a system would have prevented the slip.19 Ultimately, the
issue is one of defining the scope of the rule that requires the defendant to act.20
That is a question of policy.
Where It All Began: Chaplin v Hicks
The possibility of recovery for loss of chance may be seen as stemming from the
decision in Chaplin v Hicks.21 This unreserved judgment of the English Court of
Appeal, in which the respondent's counsel was not even called on to argue, has
been enormously influential. Consequently, the facts are well known. The
plaintiff entered a contest in which 12 women were to be offered theatrical
engagement for a period of three years each. Her photograph was selected by
readers of a newspaper in the region in which she lived as the most beautiful
among the contestants from that region. This entitled her, along with 49 others, to
be interviewed by the defendant and a committee for the purposes of final
selection. In breach of the contract between them, the defendant failed to notify
her in time of the interview and avoided giving her a subsequent interview. A
jury awarded her £100 damages. The award was upheld by the Court of Appeal.
Although her chances of being awarded one of the 12 positions may have been
less than one in four, it was held that she had lost something of monetary value.
Even though there was no market for the opportunity that the contract gave her
and she could not have sold her right, damages were not unassessable. Precision
was not necessary and the jury had to do the best it could on the evidence
available.22 The court could not interfere with the assessment it made.
This decision was ahead of the American practice of the time, which generally
embodied a "rule of certainty".23 It was described approvingly by an American
text as "leading the way to a liberal practice", though attributed to the habit of
English judges "of concealing problems of certainty under the cloak of
'remoteness'" and "their adherence to the tradition that questions of damages are
for the jury's discretion".24 Be that as it may, the decision was followed in
Australia in Howe v Teefy.25 In this case the plaintiff leased a horse from the
defendant with the intention of training and racing him. The plaintiff claimed
that he would have made a profit by betting on the horse himself and providing
tips to others as to the horse and its prospects. In breach of the contract, the
defendant withdrew the horse from the plaintiff. A jury having assessed the
plaintiff's damages at £250, an appeal by the defendant was dismissed. The case
for allowing the jury to evaluate the chance that the plaintiff would have made a
profit from the use of the horse was said to be stronger than in Chaplin v Hicks,
since the plaintiff here could probably have sold the right to lease the horse and
had in any event paid for the right to lease it whereas the plaintiff in Chaplin v
Hicks had paid nothing.26
In Fink v Fink27 a wife claimed damages from her husband for breach of a
contract which, she claimed, would have given her the chance of reconciliation
with him. Dixon and McTiernan JJ denied her claim for damages, distinguishing
Chaplin v Hicks on the ground that the loss here was, in the language of Vaughan
Williams LJ in that case "so dependent on the mere unrestricted volition of
another that it is impossible to say that there is any assessable loss resulting from
the breach".28 Latham CJ and Williams J, in their dissent, took the view that since
Chaplin v Hicks it could not be said that the fact that an element in the
contingency on which a contractual benefit depends is the exercise of the will of
a particular person makes such benefit irrecoverable.29 Deane J took a similar
view in Commonwealth v Amann Aviation Pty Ltd,30 being of the opinion that it
was no answer to the plaintiff's claim in Chaplin v Hicks that there was a
possibility that the defendant might arbitrarily have denied her a prize.
Reconciliation between husband and wife is obviously something different from a
commercial decision to offer employment as an actress or to renew a contract to
provide surveillance for Australia's coastline and Fink v Fink should not be seen
as standing in the way of awarding damages for loss of a chance in the medical
context. Whether or not it depends on the husband's unrestricted volition to
reconcile with the wife or on the grounds that reconciliation was so speculative
that there was no reasonable chance of benefiting the wife, as was held in Davies
v Taylor,31 a Lord Campbell's Act action brought by a separated wife, a real
chance of effecting a medical cure or alleviation is distinguishable. In Amann
Brennan J, too, citing Chaplin v Hicks, recognised that in appropriate
circumstances the loss of a chance is the proper subject of compensatory
damages.32
Chaplin v Hicks was distinguished also in McRae v Commonwealth Disposals
Commission.33 The contract in Chaplin was said to be one "to give the plaintiff a
chance", whereas in McRae the plaintiff had no real chance of discovering a
tanker which had never existed. An issue that we shall have to consider below is
how it may be determined in a medical negligence case that the plaintiff had no
real chance of a cure or alleviation if proper skill is exercised.34 However, if the
chance that still existed at the time of the treatment was a real one, Chaplin v
Hicks and its acceptance in Australia should allow the plaintiff to recover for the
value of the lost chance notwithstanding that the chance was less than an even
one. We shall look later at the acceptance of the principle of Chaplin v Hicks in
the High Court in a claim for breach of the Trade Practices Act 1974 (Cth), s52,35
and at the dicta in the latest Australian High Court cases that consider the issue
in the context of medical negligence,36 but before doing so we turn to another
area of professional liability in which loss of chance has been significant.
Solicitors
The principle of Chaplin v Hicks was applied without reference to the case in
Kitchen v Royal Air Forces Association.37 Like Chaplin v Hicks, this was also an
unreserved judgment of the English Court of Appeal, but unlike the earlier case it
was given after some 10 days of argument on a number of issues. Having upheld
the trial judge's decision that the firm of solicitors was negligent in failing to
issue proceedings in a Lord Campbell's Act claim, the court had to consider
whether the trial judge's award of two-thirds of the maximum damages that
could have been awarded in the original action should be upheld. Lord Evershed
MR rejected the argument that if the plaintiff would on the balance of
probabilities have succeeded in her original action, she was entitled to the
damages that would have been awarded in that action in full; whereas if she
would probably have failed, then she was entitled to nominal damages only. He
took the view that she would have been entitled to the full damages if she must
have succeeded in the original action. On the other hand, if she must have failed,
in his view she would have been entitled to nominal damages only. He refused to
countenance the argument that in the latter circumstances her claim would still
have had a nuisance value and therefore she should be entitled to the value of
that.38 The present case falling somewhere between the extremes, the court had to
determine whether she had lost "some right of value" and to determine what that
value was as best it could.39 Parker LJ, too. said that unless the court was satisfied
that the plaintiff's claim was bound to fail, something more than nominal
damages were to be awarded.40 All three members of the Court of Appeal
regarded the trial judge's estimate of two-thirds as high, but as the particular
percentage was not challenged they upheld the award.41 There is no suggestion
that if the trial judge had fixed the percentage at one-third (or anything less than
50 per cent), this would not have been upheld too. Indeed, such a suggestion
would be contrary to the principle applied, namely that if the plaintiff had lost
something of value the court had to do the best it could to evaluate it, just as in
Chaplin v Hicks the plaintiff was entitled to a jury award even if her chances of
winning a prize were less than one in four.
Kitchen's case was followed by Bray CJ in Tutenkoff v Thiele,42 where it was
held that in evaluating the chance of success in the original action the court could
take account of evidence that would probably have been advanced on behalf of
the original defendant, but which was not put forward in the action against the
solicitor. Taking account of such evidence, which would probably have led to a
greater reduction for contributory negligence or even possibly a finding of no
liability, his Honour held that the damages as now assessed should be reduced by
40 per cent.
Kitchen's case and Tutenkoff v Thiele were cited as apparently correctly stating
the law in Johnson v Perez.43 This was a case where it was accepted that the
plaintiff must have succeeded in the original action which the defendant
solicitors had neglected to bring. The issue was whether the damages had to be
assessed as at the time when the original action should have been brought or at
the time of the action against the solicitors. It was accepted that the answer to the
problem did not depend on whether the action was brought in contract or tort.44
Only Brennan J dealt with the measure of damages in a case of uncertainty. He
was of the opinion that the "value of the lost cause of action cannot be assessed as
though there were a market for doubtful causes of action in damages for personal
injury".45 Thus he refused to recognise that the plaintiff would be entitled to a
percentage of the maximum damages that could be awarded. He required the
court to find whether the plaintiff probably would have succeeded or failed or
compromised the action and to award damages accordingly. He cited no
authority for this and was alone in so thinking.46
In the companion case of Nikolaou v Papasavas Phillips & Co47 Mason CJ, with
respect, correctly cited Kitchen as authority for the proposition that on the retrial
of the action, the order for which the High Court upheld, the court would "need
to determine what the appellant would have recovered but for [the solicitors']
negligence and will need to discount that amount by the chance that he would
not have been successful in that claim". He did not suggest that the discount
could not be greater than 50 per cent. In the court below, from whose decision the
appeal was dismissed, all three judges emphasised that the plaintiff's damages
were for the loss of the chance of success in the original action.48 Murphy J
specifically stated that the damages to be assessed for the loss of this chance "are
quite different from the damages which ought to have been assessed in" the
original action.49 He acknowledged that the amount of the likely award could
provide a guide to the evaluation of the lost chance,50 but that it would require
adjustment in the light of the strength or weakness of the plaintiff's case on
liability and quantum.51
This is the approach that has been taken in many such actions against
solicitors.52 In none has it been suggested that damages may be awarded only if it
was more probable than not that the original action, appeal or other proceeding
that the solicitor failed to prosecute would have succeeded. Such an argument
was advanced, but rejected, in what is now the leading English Court of Appeal
decision on the point.53 In some of the Australian cases the actual award has
reflected the opinion that the plaintiff's prospects of success were not better than
even.54 There is an obiter dictum by Deane J that expressly recognises that the
chance of success may be less than 50 per cent.55
In some cases it has been claimed that the negligence of the solicitors deprived
the plaintiff not of the opportunity of success in litigation, but of the chance of
acting in a particular way. In such circumstances the courts have usually denied
the plaintiff damages on the basis of loss of chance, requiring instead that the
plaintiff prove on a balance of probabilities that he or she would have acted
differently if the advice given had not been negligent. Thus the proposition has
been stated that "if the reality of the chance depends on some action that the
plaintiff would need to have taken, he or she must establish on the balance of
probabilities that the action would in fact have been taken".56 We shall see below
that the High Court has apparently accepted this distinction57 and that a similar
distinction has been drawn in the context of medical treatment.58
Loss of a Commercial Opportunity
The Australian High Court has twice held that a plaintiff may recover damages
for loss of a commercial opportunity though the chance of the loss occurring was
assessed at less than 50 per cent. As stated in Sellars v Adelaide Petroleum NL,59
in Commonwealth v Amann Aviation Pty Ltd60 four of the judges "concluded that
a lost commercial advantage or opportunity was a compensable loss, even though
there was a less than 50 per cent likelihood that the commercial advantage would
be realized. Damages for breach of contract were assessed by reference to the
probabilities or possibilities of what would have happened". In Sellars itself the
trial judge had held that if not for a contravention of s52 of the Trade Practices
Act 1974 (Cth), the plaintiff would have continued to negotiate an agreement,
which had a 40 per cent prospect of being performed successfully. He awarded
damages under s82(1) of the Act for loss of this opportunity. The High Court
upheld this decision. It held that, as in tort, loss or damage is the gist of the action
under s82(1).61 The loss of the commercial opportunity that would have arisen if
the agreement had been entered into was itself a loss that qualified for the
purposes of s82(1). Thereafter, it was a matter of valuation and the trial judge's
discount of 60 per cent from the full value of successful performance because of
the various contingencies that attended such performance was upheld.
A similar view has been indicated in the House of Lords, in a case where the
defendant was held liable for negligently giving the plaintiff a bad reference. In
remitting the case for assessment of damages, Lord Lowry, citing Chaplin v Hicks,
indicated that all the plaintiff had to prove was that he had lost a reasonable
chance of employment.62
In New Zealand, too, the Court of Appeal has recognised on at least two
occasions that damages may be awarded for loss of a commercial opportunity.63
It need not be proved on the balance of probabilities that the opportunity would
have had a successful outcome. All that need be proved on a balance of
probabilities is that the plaintiff had such a chance and was deprived of it.
The Court in Sellars distinguished several cases where proof on a balance of
probabilities had apparently been required.64 It thought that these turned
"primarily on the issue of causation" and expressed the opinion that "[w]hen the
issue of causation turns on what the plaintiff would have done, there is no
particular reason for departing from proof on the balance of probabilities
notwithstanding that the question is hypothetical".65 It reiterated that "the general
standard of proof in civil actions will ordinarily govern the issue of causation and
the issue whether the applicant has sustained loss or damage. Hence the applicant
must prove on the balance of probabilities that he or she has sustained some loss
or damage".66 For the purposes of proceedings under the Trade Practices Act the
plaintiff had proved such loss by proof of the loss of the commercial opportunity,
even though its valuation was less than 50 per cent of the full value of the
agreement. There is no reason in principle why the court should not similarly
recognise the loss of an opportunity to be cured as something that itself has
value. All that the plaintiff need then prove on the balance of probabilities is that
the defendant's negligence caused the plaintiff to lose a chance of cure that is not
entirely speculative. Once that is proved, it is for the court to do the best it can to
value the chance, even if cure is less probable than not. Whether that should be
confined to cases where the chance does not depend on the plaintiff's own
response to advice will be considered below.
Before leaving Sellars two points need to be made. First, the distinction
between causation, which must be proved on a balance of probabilities, and
valuation, where chances may be taken into account, is not one that is always
easy to make.67 Secondly, the court acknowledged in the first of the above
quotations that proof of causation was required on a balance of probabilities
"notwithstanding that the question is hypothetical". This recognises that
hypothetical questions do not normally require proof on a balance of
probabilities. The converse of this is that so-called questions of past (or
"historical") fact do normally require such proof. It is to this distinction that we
now turn.
The Distinction between Past Facts and Future or
Hypothetical Facts
In a well-known passage, Lord Diplock said:
The role of the court in making an assessment of damages which depends upon its view as to what will
be and what would have been is to be contrasted with its ordinary function in civil actions of
determining what was. In determining what did happen in the past a court decides on the balance of
probabilities. Anything that is more probable than not it treats as certain. But in assessing damages
which depend upon its view as to what will happen in the future or would have happened in the future if
something had not happened in the past, the court must make an estimate as to what are the chances
that a particular thing will or would have happened and reflect those chances, whether they are more or
less than even, in the amount of damages which it awards.68
This was approved by the High Court in Malec v J C Hutton Pty Ltd.69 In this
case the plaintiff was suffering from a neurotic condition induced by brucellosis
that he had contracted owing to his employer's negligence. The lower courts
found that he was also suffering from a degenerative condition of the spine that
was equally likely to have caused him to suffer a similar neurotic condition. The
majority of the intermediate appellate court held that he was not entitled to
damages for economic loss after the time when the neurotic condition would
probably have developed anyway. The High Court reversed the decision and
referred the case back for further assessment of the damages. It went further than
the statement of Lord Diplock in relation to past hypothetical events, saying: "The
approach is the same whether it is alleged that the event would have occurred
before or might occur after the assessment of damages takes place."70
This approach to hypothetical events that might or might not have occurred
has since been applied almost daily where the plaintiff was suffering a condition,
such as a natural degeneration of the spine, that might have affected him or her if
the injury for which damages are being assessed had not been incurred. As the
late John Fleming pointed out, however, this raises large questions in relation to
causation, since causal inquiries inevitably involve asking the hypothetical
question of what would have happened if the defendant had not been negligent.71
The High Court's response, as we have seen, was to suggest that proof on the
balance of probabilities would continue to be required in relation to causation, at
least in those cases that depend on the plaintiff's own response to advice.72
Strangely, two earlier High Court cases that might have been considered
relevant to the problem it faced were not cited in Malec. These were Watts v
Rake73 and Purkess v Crittenden.74 They were concerned with the onus of proof
where the defendant has undoubtedly caused an injury to the plaintiff, but there
is a dispute as to whether a natural condition or some other event would have
resulted in the plaintiff suffering from a similar disability without the injury. The
cases place an evidential onus on the defendant to show with some precision
what would have been the effects if the plaintiff had not been injured by the
defendant, but leave the ultimate onus on the plaintiff to prove that the defendant
caused the harm for which damages are sought.75 There is no suggestion in either
of them that the plaintiff may recover damages for the full effects of the present
condition, discounted by the chances that some of those effects may have
occurred in any event. To reconcile these different lines of authority,76 it is
necessary to say that the plaintiff must prove on the balance of probabilities that
the defendant's negligence did contribute materially to the present symptoms
(this is the legal onus that rests on the plaintiff). Once that is satisfied, there is an
evidential onus on the defendant of proving that the alleged pre-existing or
subsequent natural condition did exist and that this condition in its natural
progression would have produced similar symptoms. If the defendant is unable to
satisfy the evidential burden, the court will reduce the plaintiff's damages for
contingencies to no greater extent than in the ordinary case. If, however, the
defendant shows that there was a real chance that the plaintiff would have
developed similar symptoms from a natural condition attaching to the plaintiff,
the court will make a greater reduction than normal to reflect this increased
chance.77
Malec was concerned with hypothetical facts, namely what would have
happened in the absence of the defendant's negligence. The High Court held that
such facts were to be evaluated according to the chances that they would have
occurred. It also pointed out that where one contingency is dependent on another,
the evaluation of the chance requires the multiplication of each by the other, so
that the final chance is a reduced percentage.78 It was not necessary to consider
events that had happened in the past, but that were also attended by uncertainty.
There was no dispute, at least before the High Court, that the diagnosis that the
plaintiff was suffering from brucellosis was correct or that he had contracted the
disease as a result of his employment. Facts of this nature would, in the view both
of Lord Diplock in Mallett v McMonagle79 and of the High Court,80 if proved on
the balance of probabilities, be treated as certain. This view was adopted by the
House of Lords in Hotson v East Berkshire AHA.81 Since this is the leading
authority in English law on loss of chance in medical negligence cases, we must
look at it closely.
In Hotson a 13-year-old boy fell from a rope on which he had been swinging
from a tree. He was taken to a hospital, where his knee, but not the upper part of
his leg, was X-rayed. He was given an elastic bandage for his knee and sent
home, with an instruction to return in 10 days. He continued to suffer
excruciating pain. Five days later he returned to the hospital, his hip was X-rayed
and a serious fracture discovered. The following day he underwent surgery. He
was left with a permanent disability. The cause of the disability was avascular
necrosis, a blockage of the blood supply to the upper femur. The hospital
admitted negligence. The trial judge found that there was a high probability,
which he put at 75 per cent, that the plaintiff would have suffered the same
disability even if he had received proper treatment at the hospital. This was
because the avascular necrosis had probably already set in. However, the
hospital's negligence made the disability certain and deprived the plaintiff of the
25 per cent chance that he might have had that it had not already gone that far
and could still have been avoided with the appropriate treatment. He awarded the
plaintiff damages for the pain and suffering the plaintiff had undergone in the
period immediately after he had been sent home by the hospital. In addition he
awarded one-quarter of the damages that he would have awarded if the hospital
had been fully liable for the disability. An appeal and cross-appeal were
dismissed by the English Court of Appeal.82 The House of Lords, however, upheld
the defendants' appeal and set aside the damages in respect of the permanent
disability.
The decision of the House of Lords depended on treating the existence or
otherwise of avascular necrosis at the time when the plaintiff presented at the
hospital as a past fact. Since the trial judge had found that there was a 75 per cent
probability that it had already occurred, the members of the House of Lords
treated it as certain. On this view, there was no chance that proper treatment
could have averted the condition. Therefore, the plaintiff had not lost the benefit
of any chance at all.83 As they saw it, their Lordships did not have to deal with a
pure case of a lost chance and they left the issue open, though with some
discouraging remarks.84
Let us change the facts of Hotson slightly.85 Assume that the plaintiff has a
cause of action against a tortfeasor who caused him to fall from the tree. Assume
also that because of his young age, treatment for one of the consequences of the
fall cannot be performed until he is much older. We know that there is a 75 per
cent chance of the treatment being successful. If the damages are assessed before
the treatment, the plaintiff must be allowed damages for the 25 per cent chance
that it will not be successful. Why, if he has not already recovered damages,
should he not have a similar remedy against someone who later performs the
treatment negligently so as to deprive the plaintiff of that 25 per cent chance? The
distinction between past and future cannot account for a different outcome. It
may be that the reason why only 75 per cent of the treatments are successful is
that 25 per cent of patients are in fact untreatable due to their genetic
constitution, but which patients are so untreatable is not presently known to
medical science. When assessing the damages against the tortfeasor who caused
the plaintiff to fall from the tree, the genetic make-up of the plaintiff is a past
fact, which may really mean that it is 100 per cent certain that the treatment will
not succeed, yet doing the best we can in the uncertain state of scientific
knowledge all that we can say is that there is a 25 per cent chance of failure. As
Waddams points out, much medical diagnosis and prognosis is a mixture of past
"fact" and future predictions.86
Another illustration might be provided by the CJD litigation.87 Assume that
100 people were injected with Human Growth Hormone after it became negligent
to continue to do so. Some of the hGH was infected with a prion that transmitted
the disease. All who received the infected hGH will eventually develop CJD if
they do not die earlier from other causes. However, no tests can tell which of the
100 people received the infected hormone and which did not. If we were able to
estimate from past experience that more than 50 will eventually develop the
disease, each of the 100 people would be able to prove on the balance of
probabilities that he or she received infected hGH. It is unlikely that any court
would award damages on that basis alone.88 On the other hand, if the estimate is
less than that, none could succeed in proving this past fact. If some of the 100
developed psychiatric illnesses from fear of developing the disease and were
awarded damages for the psychiatric illness,89 a court would probably apply
Malec and take account of the risk of developing the disease itself even if the
probability was less than even, despite that risk being itself dependent on the
past, but unknowable, fact that the plaintiff did or did not receive an infected
dose. As will be suggested below, a better solution to this particular problem
would be to award damages for the present illness and postpone the assessment
of damages for the disease itself until it actually occurs, if it ever does.90
A further illustration of the futility of trying to distinguish between past and
present facts in some circumstances has been suggested by recent events in
Florida. Assume that someone sets fire to a polling station immediately after an
election has been held. One of the candidates is inside the station at the time and
is permanently disabled as a result of the fire. The ballot box is also destroyed in
the fire. The candidate sues the person who started the fire. The candidate's
earning capacity has been affected, but by how much? If the outcome of the
election had been successful for the candidate, the earning capacity would have
been assessed on one basis; if the candidate had lost, the earning capacity would
have been assessed on a different basis. The outcome would have been dependent
on the votes cast and that is a past fact. Yet, we can now never know how many
votes were cast for the candidate and how many for the opponents. We would
have to assess damages based on the chances of success, estimated as best we can.
It should be noted that events that lie in the future at the time the cause of
action arises are taken into account on an all-or-nothing basis when they have
occurred by the time of the trial. If a candidate for political office were killed
before polling day and the election were postponed, we would assess the damages
for the dependants on the basis of the probabilities of election if the death had not
occurred. The probabilities may be less than even, as long as they are not entirely
speculative.91 But if the death occurs, say, just as polling closes, the court would
probably take into account the actual votes cast, even if they are nullified by the
death, and assess the damages on the basis that the candidate would or would not
have been elected. Since facts are preferred to prophecies, where a surviving
spouse has died or remarried before the trial of a Lord Campbell's Act action, the
damages are assessed with regard to the now known fact;92 whereas, if they had
not already happened, these matters would be assessed as contingent and the
chances of their occurring would be estimated.93 In the earlier illustration varying
the facts of Hotson, so that the claim was brought against someone who caused
the boy to fall from the tree, the damages are assessed at 25 per cent of the loss if
there is a 75 per cent chance of medical treatment avoiding particular
consequences. However, if the medical treatment has already been given and the
outcome is known, the damages are assessed on the basis of that outcome, which
is all or nothing. Facts that are knowable must, of course, be proved on the
balance of probabilities. In the case of the death or remarriage of a plaintiff in a
Lord Campbell's Act action, the party bearing the onus of proof on the issue
would have to establish the fact of the surviving spouse's subsequent death or
remarriage on the balance of probabilities or it will be ignored. The court cannot
reduce the damages on the basis of a chance that the death or remarriage has
already occurred.
The distinction between facts that are knowable, and that must therefore be
proved on a balance of probabilities, and those that are not, where allowance can
be made for chances, is not always clear cut. In the Hotson variation, the medical
treatment might already have been given, but the outcome might still be
precarious at the time of the trial. In such circumstances, it would be appropriate
to assess the damages on the basis of the chance of a successful outcome, whether
that is more or less than 50 per cent.
Support for the view that too much should not be made of the distinction
between future and past events may be found in some dicta of Deane J in
Commonwealth v Amanti Aviation Pty Ltd. Under the heading "Loss of a chance",
his Honour dealt at some length with the need, in order to do justice, to assess
damages by reference to chances where facts related to the future or to what
would have happened in the past.94 He concluded:
It is true that Lord Reid's reasons for rejecting the balance of probability test in the circumstances of
Davies v Taylor could be applied equally to some categories of case in which a court is concerned with
the determination of past events. That does not mean, however, that the traditional approach for
determining past facts should be applied to a case requiring the assessment of damages on the basis of
what would have happened or will happen. To the contrary, it lends support for the view that there is a
need for modification or reassessment in some categories of case of the conventional approach that, in
assessing damages for what has occurred in the past, a court decides on the balance of probabilities and
assumes certainty where none in truth exists.95
On the facts of the case before him, he found it unnecessary to pursue this
further. Although some of his citations indicate that he might have been prepared
to measure even past "facts" by the chances that they might or might not have
occurred, his first citation may indicate only a relaxation of what amounts to
proof on a balance of probabilities, where a "robust" approach to the finding of a
causal link enables a court to treat as certain otherwise doubtful connections.96
But, as Waddams has pointed out, the odds on a roll of dice are the same whether
the roll is about to take place or the dice have already been rolled and the dice are
covered.97 Damages should be similarly assessed.
That does not mean, of course, that every disputed fact is to be taken into
account according to the chances that it occurred. In some of the cases dealt with
below, disputes arose as to whether the plaintiff told the medical practitioner of
symptoms that should have led to a particular diagnosis. If relevant, the judge has
to resolve such disputes on the balance of probabilities. Once so resolved, the fact
is taken as certain.98 A plaintiff cannot recover damages for the chance that he or
she might have told the doctor, even though often the trial is many years after the
event and no-one can know for certain whether or not the doctor was told. The
plaintiff must prove on the balance of probabilities that he or she did lose a
chance99 and where that turns on what the doctor was told, that must be
established on the balance of probabilities. This is the explanation of the decision
in Hotson: the plaintiff simply failed to prove that there was a chance of any sort
of preventing the disability. Nevertheless, it is the sort of case where justice
requires the relaxation of the strict rule. A rigid application of the rule in a case
that turns on whether the plaintiff's cancer had already developed secondary
cancers elsewhere in the body at the time when the doctor should have detected
it, so that treatment would have been comparatively futile, would mean that the
plaintiff would fail altogether if the proof shows that there was a 51 per cent
probability of it having done so, but would succeed wholly if there was only a 49
per cent probability.100 It would be better to allow the plaintiff to succeed and to
reduce the damages by the percentage probability that it had already occurred.101
As Professor Waddams has put it, "[w]here the primary significance of a past fact
is what it indicates about the future it should ... be treated as a hypothetical fact,
and uncertainty assessed according to the probabilities rather than on an all-or-
nothing basis".102
“Open” and “Closed” Cases
It is suggested that in the interests of justice, courts should draw a distinction
between what might be called "open" and "closed" chance cases, Fleming has
correctly observed that "[l]oss of chance is the mirror image of the proposition
that exposure to risk should be compensable. Just as chance quantifies the
probability of a positive outcome (cure), risk describes the probability of a
negative occurrence".103 However, mirror images are not identical. Let us deal
first with exposure to risk. These can be said to be "open" cases.
A plaintiff who has been exposed to a risk, which may or may not occur, is
confronted with a dilemma resulting from the once-and-for-all rule of assessment
of damages.104 First, if the plaintiff waits to see whether the risk will occur before
suing and the court recognises that some damage has already been suffered, the
plaintiff might find that the limitation period has run before the risk
eventuates.105 Secondly, if the plaintiff sues before the risk occurs, the plaintiff
will be awarded damages only on the basis of the chance that the risk will
eventuate. While the plaintiff then receives a windfall if it never does, the
plaintiff is likely to be much undercompensated if the risk does eventuate.106
To avoid these problems, the law may simply state that the risk is not itself
damage sufficient to satisfy the gist of an action in negligence.107 This way of
avoiding the problem cannot be adopted where the plaintiff suffers some
recognised damage and the uncertain future risk is a consequence. As long as the
once-and-for-all rule remains in place, the court must assess the damages on the
basis of its estimate of the chances of the risk eventuating. Inevitably then, the
plaintiff is over- or undercompensated.108
There is a solution here. That is to adopt legislation for what are known as
provisional damages. Their introduction in England in 1985 by Rules of Court109
made pursuant to the Supreme Court Act 1981 (Eng), s 32A, followed
recommendations by the Law Commission.110 They are intended, according to
the Commission, to provide for what it calls "chance" cases, as opposed to
"forecast" cases where a deterioration in the plaintiff's condition is probable, but
its severity is uncertain.111 The provisional damages are then assessed at the time
of the trial without regard to the possibility of the loss occurring, but the event
that will authorise a return to court for further assessment is specified with
particularity. A similar provision was adopted in the Dust Diseases Tribunal Act
1989 (NSW), sllA.112 The New South Wales Law Reform Commission has
recommended that, with some modifications, legislation such as that under the
Dust Diseases Tribunal Act be introduced for general application in personal
injury actions in the State.113 It should be adopted everywhere.
Whether or not such recommendations are adopted to deal with these "open"
chance cases, the problems with "closed" chance cases are not the same. Although
the issue remains whether loss of chance on its own should be regarded as
damage for the purpose of a negligence action, the reasons for not so recognising
it in the "open" chance cases do not apply. Where a medical practitioner has
simply failed to diagnose a condition for which there was a chance of cure if
treated at the time, the lack of a cure will already have eventuated at the time of
any trial. Limitation problems are no different from any other case of professional
negligence. They are linked to discovery of the fact of negligence, not to reasons
for awaiting the eventuation of a risk.114 The court will be in no better position to
assess the damages for the missed chance if the assessment is postponed. Of
course, the uncertainty as to what would have happened if the chance had not
been missed and what will now happen remains. That uncertainty is inevitable,
but plagues all personal injury litigation.
Medical Practitioners
What the courts or legislatures do with "open" cases of exposure to risk is not
directly relevant to the issue of whether medical practitioners should be held
liable for the loss of a chance of preventing or alleviating a medical condition for
which the practitioner is not responsible. Before considering the Australian
authorities, we shall refer briefly to those in the United Kingdom, Canada and the
United States.
Overseas Authorities
United Kingdom
The issue arose comparatively early in Scotland. In Kenyon v Bell115 a child fell
and cut her eye. She was taken to hospital, where she was treated. Some months
later the eye had to be removed. She alleged among other things that she had
been deprived by negligence of the chance of saving the eye. In interlocutory
proceedings it was held that such an allegation was insufficient, the pursuer
being required to prove on the balance of probabilities that the defender's
negligence had caused her loss. The matter was allowed to go to trial on her other
allegations, but she failed, since the judge held that "no treatment could have
made any difference because the initial injury involved a perforating wound of
the sclera with consequent haemorrhaging into the interior of the eye".116
The finding that damage had probably already occurred and was therefore to
be treated as certain, so that no treatment would have made any difference, lay
also at the heart of the decision of the House of Lords in Hotson v East Berkshire
AHA,117 which has already been discussed. There it was held that the issue of loss
of chance did not arise. In the Court of Appeal, however, the trial judge's award
of damages based on loss of a 25 per cent chance of being treated successfully had
been upheld.118 Sir John Donaldson MR there said:
As a matter of common sense, it is unjust that there should be no liability for failure to treat a patient,
simply because the chances of a successful cure by that treatment were less than 50 per cent. Nor, by the
same token, can it be just that if the chances of a successful cure only marginally exceed 50 per cent, the
doctor or his employer should be liable to the same extent as if the treatment could be guaranteed to
cure. If this is the law, it is high time that it was changed, assuming that this court has power to do so.119
His Lordship went on to suggest that the use of the word "chance" confused the
distinct processes of identifying the loss and valuing it.120 He preferred to say that
the plaintiff had lost the benefit that he would have derived from the treatment
that should have been given to him. This seems to be no more than a semantic
distinction. Dillon LJ, too, thought it to be contrary to common sense that if a
patient has only a chance of cure and loses that chance through a doctor's
negligent failure to diagnose or treat, the patient can only recover damages if the
chance were more than 50 per cent. He observed that medicine does not deal only
in certainties.121 Croom-Johnson LJ emphasised that it is a chance personal to the
plaintiff that must be shown to have been lost, not merely a statistical chance.122
In the House of Lords Lord Bridge saw the analogy with Chaplin v Hicks and
Kitchen as attractive, but superficial. Although he left the matter open, he saw
formidable difficulties in the way of accepting the analogy.123 He did not explain
what he perceived those difficulties to be. Similarly, Lord Mackay considered it
unwise to lay down a rule that a plaintiff could never succeed on loss of a chance
in a medical negligence case.124 He set out at length passages from Herskovits v
Group Health Cooperative125In order to demonstrate that a variety of views is
possible in "this difficult area of the law".126 Lord Ackner took the view that
liability has to be established on a balance of probabilities and once so
established, the loss which the plaintiff has sustained is paid in full. He
disapproved of the decision in Bagley v North Herts HA,127 where damages
awarded for causing a child to be stillborn were discounted by 5 per cent because
of the chance that it would have been stillborn without negligence.128 This is
clearly inconsistent with the decision of the High Court of Australia in Malec.129
Despite the matter having been left open by the House of Lords, there appears
to be only one subsequent medical negligence case in England in which the
damages were assessed on the basis of loss of chance. This was Judge v
Huntingdon Health Authority,130 where the failure to diagnose the plaintiff's
breast cancer when it should have been identified was held to have deprived her
of an 80 per cent chance of a full expectation of life and the damages were
assessed accordingly. The judge relied on the statement of Lord Diplock in
Mallett v McMonagle,131 quoted above, and a similar statement of Lord Reid in
Davies v Taylor132 and found nothing in Hotson to the contrary. Since, however,
the judgment shows confusion between the issue of whether a chance is itself
damage and cases where there is undoubtedly damage, but the consequences are
dependent on contingencies, it is not of much value, even though its outcome is
in accordance with the contention put forward here.
Canada
The Supreme Court of Canada rejected the doctrine of loss of chance in a medical
negligence case in Laferrière v Lawson.133 The defendant performed a biopsy of a
lump in the plaintiff's breast, which the pathology report showed to be cancerous.
However, he did not inform her of this finding or arrange any follow-up. She
became aware of cancer in her system only some three and a half years later.
Despite treatment, she died from it. The trial judge was not persuaded that
treatment at the earlier stage would probably have prevented the spread of the
cancer and gave judgment for the defendant. The intermediate Court of Appeal,
however, by majority, awarded damages of $C50,000 for loss of a real and serious
chance of benefiting from earlier treatment so that she might have survived
longer. An appeal by the defendant to the Supreme Court was upheld and the
damages reduced to $C17,500, being $C10,000 for the plaintiff's psychological
suffering as a result of not being informed of the original detection of cancer and
$C7,500 for the improvement in the quality of her life during her last months had
the treatment been undertaken sooner. La Forest J dissented and would have
upheld the award below for the reasons of one of the majority.
This case came from Quebec, where a civil code is in force. The Supreme Court
began its analysis with a lengthy consideration of the law on loss of chance in
France and Belgium. It attributed the fact that "French and Belgian courts have
been especially alert to the contingency of lost chances" to a different approach to
causation from that adopted in Quebec. Holding that proof of causation must be
established on the balance of probabilities, it rejected the application of loss of
chance to medical negligence cases. Loss of chance should, in its opinion, be
confined to exceptional situations, of which destruction of a lottery ticket was the
purest example.
The present Chief Justice of Canada was a member of the court that gave this
decision. Clearly, she does not see it as foreclosing the issue in the common law
jurisdictions of Canada. She has since written: "Although recovery for loss of
chance has been considered in the context of Quebec civil law, it has not been
evaluated under the common law."134
United States
We have seen that Chaplin v Hicks135 was regarded as an advance on the
insistence by courts in the United States on certainty.136 The article by J H King
Jr, to which frequent reference has been made above, was very influential in
changing the attitude of many courts.137 There remains a division of opinion as to
whether to recognise the doctrine of loss of chance. A 1992 article, itself opposed
to the use of loss of chance, claimed that "a majority of jurisdictions have
declined to relax the standard of causation or create a new compensable
injury".138 Yet, in listing the jurisdictions still adhering to the "reasonable medical
probability standard", the article shows that they are in the minority.139 By 2000,
at least two of those jurisdictions had adopted the loss of chance doctrine.140 The
debate appears to have moved on to the question of how the chance is to be
valued.141 This latter debate will not be considered here. It is often tied up with
what the jury is to be allowed to do.
Australian Cases
High Court dicta
In Naxakis v Western & General Hospital142 the plaintiff schoolboy had been hit
over the head in a minor scuffle with one of his friends. He was taken to hospital,
where he was kept for nine days. Two days after he was discharged, he suffered a
burst aneurism, which led to serious brain damage. In his action against the
school principal, those who would be vicariously liable for her, the doctor who
treated him and the hospital, the trial judge withdrew the case from the jury. His
decision to do so was upheld by the Victorian Court of Appeal, in a judgment
delivered by Hayne JA (as he then was).143 The High Court granted special leave
to appeal only in respect of the action against the doctor and the hospital. It
upheld the appeal and ordered a new trial. Its decision was based on there having
been sufficient evidence of negligence and causation of the injury to have been
left to the jury. The judges found it unnecessary to deal with the argument that
had been put in the alternative that the plaintiff had been deprived of a chance of
avoiding the burst aneurism and the jury should have been allowed to assess the
value of the chance.144 Before the retrial the Victorian Supreme Court had to
consider whether to allow an amendment to the pleadings so that this argument
could be advanced. Hedigan J declined to do so, being of the opinion that a
majority of the High Court was opposed to the doctrine of loss of chance.145 For
this, he relied on dicta in Chappel v Hart146 and Naxakis itself, which we shall
investigate shortly. He also relied on the article by Perrochet et al,147 which he
said showed that a majority of jurisdictions in the United States did not apply
loss of chance,148 which "strongly criticised" King's theory, and which
"caution[ed] against recognition of the lost chance as a compensable injury, on
policy grounds".149 Leave to appeal was refused by the Court of Appeal, mainly
because of the length of time that had elapsed,150 but also because of the
possibility of amending the pleadings at the trial if the evidence justified it. The
case was settled after the hearing of the retrial had begun. So it provided no
answer to whether Australian law will recognise loss of chance in medical
negligence cases.
The dicta in the High Court are far from conclusive in favour of rejecting loss
of chance. Most strongly opposed to the notion have been Brennan and Gaudron
JJ in cases not concerned with medical negligence, though the latter has reiterated
her stance in this context. We have already seen that Brennan J took a more
uncompromising attitude than the rest of the court in the solicitors' negligence
cases dealt with above.151 In Sellars he quoted and expressly agreed with the
following passage in Gaudron J's judgment in Bennett v Minister of Community
Welfare:
It might be said that, where questions of causation depend on hypothetical considerations, allowance
should be made, as in the assessment of damages, for the possibility that some event would not have
occurred. Possibilities, if they are not fanciful, must be taken into account, at least in a general way,
whenever causation or the related issue of prevention is in issue. But questions of that kind are not
answered "maybe" or, even, "more probably than not". They are answered "yes" or "no" depending on the
probabilities for or against. In this respect, they are indistinguishable from the question whether an event
happened where possibilities are taken into account but, once the question has been answered, those
possibilities have no further bearing on the matter.152
She was, however, a party to the joint judgment of all but Brennan J in Sellars
and must therefore recognise that if the loss itself constitutes harm that satisfies
the requirement of the gist of the action, then one can quite readily answer "yes"
or "no" to the question whether the defendant has caused the plaintiff to suffer
that harm. Possibilities must then come into the evaluation of the loss, just as in
Sellars it was accepted that there was a 40 per cent chance of successfully
negotiating the contract that the defendant deprived the plaintiff of the chance of
doing.
Say that a plaintiff has a less than 50 per cent chance of not having a leg
amputated if a surgeon takes reasonable care in treating it. The surgeon fails to
take care and the patient loses the leg. In Bennett Gaudron J took the view that
one might infer causation whenever a defendant fails to take required
precautions against a particular risk, which then eventuates, in the absence of
evidence that the breach had no effect or the harm would have occurred
anyway.153 On this view, one might infer that the surgeon's negligence deprived
the patient of the chance of saving the leg, but one could not infer that it caused
the loss of the leg, since more probably than not that would have happened even
if the surgeon had not been negligent. The plaintiff should be entitled to damages
for that loss. Otherwise, according to those who believe that the law of torts
operates as a significant deterrent, medical practitioners can be as negligent as
they like when treating seriously ill patients who have less than a 50 per cent
chance of survival, since the doctors would never be liable if the patient did not
survive. A similar point has been made by Professor Waddams in relation to
Hotson: if the doctor in that case had four patients annually, only one of whom
had a chance of not developing permanent incapacity, the doctor could treat all
four of them negligently and would not be liable to any of them.154
In Chappel v Hart Gaudron J categorised the plaintiff's loss as "clearly ... not
the loss of a chance – valuable or otherwise – but the physical injury which she,
in fact, sustained".155 This is questionable. To some extent it may depend on a
view of the facts that was not accepted by all the judges. In this case, the plaintiff
was not warned of a risk that her voice might be affected by an operation which
she needed to undergo at some stage. By the time the case reached the High
Court, it was not contested that in the circumstances of her having expressed
concern that she should not have a "voice like Neville Wran" after the operation,
it was negligent on the part of the defendant, who carried out the surgery with all
due care and skill, not to warn her of this risk. The risk did eventuate. Gaudron J
held that on the evidence it had to be accepted that the risk to which the plaintiff
was exposed would have been less if the operation had been performed by a more
experienced surgeon, to whom she would probably have resorted if she had been
warned.156 Her Honour pointed out that if there had been evidence that even if
when performed by a more experienced surgeon the risk was a "probability", it
would have had to be taken into account.157 Since she cited part of the judgment
in Malec,158 to which she was a party, she must have meant a possibility that was
more than speculative. Be that as it may, since the chance of the risk occurring on
any other occasion than the one when it did was extremely small, the damages
would have been reduced only by a small amount under the Malec doctrine.
As commentators have pointed out, the plaintiff did lose a chance by not being
warned. She lost the chance of going into the operation metaphorically with her
eyes open. For being deprived of this chance, she should have been compensated,
at least by a conventional figure, for the intangible harm to her autonomy and
dignity.159 But this was not an argument that was put. The chance for which she
contended, as McHugh J saw it, was an opportunity to seek a higher standard of
care or better treatment from another surgeon, or even in effect a guarantee of
the absence of a perforation of the oesophagus. In his Honour's dissenting
opinion, there was nothing in the doctor-patient relationship to require the
defendant to provide the plaintiff with such opportunities.160
Gummow J pointed out that the plaintiff did not put her case as one for loss of
a chance at all; that it was the defendant who sought to reduce his liability by
reference to the doctrine.161 His Honour made reference to the Canadian cases,
but gave no indication of his own approach to the question. Kirby J, too, referred
to the defendant having raised loss of chance at a late stage and the plaintiff not
having done so at the trial. Since the evidence might have been different, he
thought a new perspective on the case should not be adopted.162 Earlier, however,
he referred to his own judgment in CES v Superclinics (Australia) Pty Ltd,163
where, he now said, he had indicated his "attraction to this approach as a more
rational and just way of calculating damages caused by established medical
negligence".164 It is difficult to find so strong an expression in favour of the
alternative way in which the plaintiff could have, but did not, put her case in CES
in the report of his Honour's judgment. Whether or not what he said in Chappel
are first or second thoughts, he cannot be regarded as opposed to the doctrine.
Finally, Hayne J thought it neither necessary nor appropriate, for reasons he gave,
to analyse the case as one for loss of chance.165 He did point to the difficulty of
evaluating a lost chance when one is dealing with very small risks, such as an
increase in risk from one in 200 to one in 100, or even more so from one in 20,000
to one in 10,000. It is in the context of the facts of the case itself that one should
understand his remark that "the loss of chance analysis is flawed and should not
be adopted". Immediately after this remark, he went on to say that he need not
and did not "express any view on the difficult questions that arise where a
plaintiff claims damages for negligence, as opposed to contract, and contends that
the damage suffered is the loss of a chance".166
The dicta in Chappel, which have been analysed here, show, as to is to be
expected, that the judges of the High Court have open minds on the question of
loss of chance in medical negligence. If Gaudron J is unsympathetic, Kirby J is in
the opposite camp and the other three are neutral. Naxakis adds little to the
picture, other than introducing an odd preliminary view from Callinan J. Gleeson
CJ expressly refrained from commenting on the alternative argument based on
loss of chance.167 Earlier, when sitting in the New South Wales Court of Appeal,
he had shown that he was at least open to an argument based on loss of chance,
even though it was in the least likely context for such an argument to be
successful, namely where the causal issue is what the plaintiff's own response
would have been to a warning or notice.168 Gaudron J elaborated on her views for
rejecting loss of chance.169 She correctly said that the doctrine of loss of chance
would not necessarily benefit individual plaintiffs.
If damages were to be awarded for the chance lost, rather than the actual injuries or disabilities suffered,
consistency would require that damages be assessed according to the value of the chance, not the injury
or disability. Thus, a chance which is 51% or greater but less than 100%, must result in an award of
damages less than would be the case if damages were awarded for the injury or disability which
eventuates.170
But Gaudron J failed to recognise the extent to which Malec now reduces
damages below 100 per cent on account of chances that might have occurred,
even where the plaintiff proves on a balance of probabilities that the defendant
did cause harm in the form of a risk that eventuated. This will be illustrated by
some of the cases dealt with below.
McHugh J was silent on the point. Kirby J expressly said that he did not need
to deal with the alternative argument relating to loss of a chance and added
nothing further.171 Callinan J did deal with the matter and expressed the view
that there is a place for the doctrine, "particularly in cases involving the practice
of what is even today said to be an art rather than a scientific skill".172 He
apparently did not see the need for consistency between cases where the plaintiff
can prove on a balance of probabilities that the harm would not have occurred
without negligence, in which he thought that the plaintiff should recover in full,
and cases of less than an even chance. He observed that there would be a small
chance in nearly every case and was concerned to confine the plaintiff's right to
recover for the loss of a chance to a substantial one. In relation to the plaintiff's
recovering in full where the plaintiff proves on a balance of probabilities that the
defendant's negligence did cause the harm, he cited Rogers v Whitaker,173 a case
where the causal issue depended on what the plaintiff's own response to a
warning would have been. This may well be a case where loss of chance is
excluded, as we shall see below.
From this, possibly tedious, recitation of the dicta of the present High Court
Justices in Australia, it should be apparent that Hedigan J should not have
concluded "that with respect to a case of alleged medical negligence in the course
of treatment (as distinct from advice) the law would not and should not entertain
a claim for damages for loss of a chance".174 All one can say is that Gaudron J is
opposed and Kirby and Callinan JJ are probably sympathetic.
Intermediate appellate court cases
In Sullivan v Micallef175 the plaintiff was awarded substantial damages for the
consequences of the defendants' negligent failure to diagnose her cancer when
they should have. Those consequences led to her early death. On appeal, it was
argued that the damages should be reduced because they should have been
assessed on the basis that there was only a chance that her cancer, if diagnosed
when it should have been, would have been successfully eradicated. This was so,
it was urged, even if the chance was a high one. The court acknowledged that the
argument raised interesting "questions which, were this the appropriate occasion,
could be pursued at length".176 However, it held that there was evidence justifying
the trial judge's conclusion that the cancer would have been successfully treated
if it had been diagnosed when it should have been and there was no justification
for interfering with this finding. Since this was a finding of a hypothetical fact –
what would have happened if there had not been negligence – it seems that some
allowance should have been made for the chance that the treatment would not
have been successful.
Some consideration was given to the issue in Board of Management of Royal
Perth Hospital v Frost.177 There a plaintiff complaining of chest pains had been
allowed to go home prematurely. This was held to be negligent. He had thereafter
suffered a heart attack. The trial judge's "modest" award of damages was upheld.
Wallwork J, with whom Malcolm CJ and Rowland J agreed on this issue, said:
[T]he respondent had to establish on the balance of probabilities that the contravening conduct caused
the loss of an opportunity for treatment which had some value, that value being ascertained by reference
to the degree of probabilities or possibilities. His Honour found that the respondent lost the chance of
having his heart muscle damage minimised or reduced by timely thrombolytic therapy. The respondent
did not have to prove on the balance of probabilities that the treatment would have been effective,
because in such a case as this that is too theoretical. Once it was established that the respondent should
have been given a second ECG, which was not given to him, he had established on the balance of
probabilities that he had lost a valuable chance of getting some treatment which may have improved his
position. He had therefore suffered loss or damage.
First instance decisions
The "loss of a chance factor" was recognised by the judge in another case of
failure to diagnose cancer, Locher v Turner.178 However, he declined to reduce the
damages by at least 40 per cent, as counsel urged, because the damages were
already conservative in significant areas and already made some allowance for
loss of a chance.179 Two more similar Queensland cases did more explicitly
reduce damages on this account. In Sturch v Willmott180 the trial judge began the
assessment of damages with a clear recognition of the task:
It is important to remember that the defendant did not cause the plaintiff to suffer from cancer. The
consequences for which he is liable to pay damages are for the extent to which he deprived her of the
chance of making a better recovery than is now the case. The evidence suggests that early diagnosis and
treatment would have given her a good chance of a successful outcome. There are however no
certainties, and the present case is a good example of one in which the prospect of some degree of trouble
in any event must be brought into account.
The judge noted that the first issue that arose was whether the first episode of
bleeding from which the plaintiff suffered was caused by a benign polyp or a
growth that was already cancerous. Although this was a past fact, no-one could
answer that with certainty or even confidence.181 He questioned the applicability
of statements that past facts are treated as certain when proved on a balance of
probability and referred to King's "useful discussion of the relationship between
pre-existing condition and the exercise of assessment of damage".182 Having
referred to Sellars, his Honour concluded:
I reject the submission of counsel for the plaintiff which would urge me to shut my eyes to the
substantial chance, perhaps of the order of forty per-cent, that the growth may already have been
cancerous when the plaintiff first consulted the defendant. That possibility will not enable me to make
any specific mathematical calculation, but it is a factor that I must take into account in discounting
damages so as to take into account the level of problems that the plaintiff may have had to face even
without any omission on the part of the defendant.
In Talbot v Lusby183 the judge said:
Mrs Talbot might not have been diagnosed as having cancer until it was too late, even if she had been
sent for an ultrasonic scan, or the aspiration needle had been sent for cytological examination, in August
1989. There might have been a false negative result again. Moreover even if the diagnosis had been made,
she might have turned out to be incurable, even at that early stage.
Under the heading "Discounting for Loss of a Chance" the judge noted that it
was common ground between the parties that these contingencies should be
allowed for by discounting of the damages, which he proceeded to do by 15 per
cent. The same principle was applied in Veivers v Connolly,184 a case of failure to
diagnose rubella in a pregnant woman. Here the damages were reduced by 5 per
cent because of the chance that, even if the condition had been diagnosed, the
plaintiff might have been unable to obtain a termination of the pregnancy.
In each of these Queensland cases the judge held that the chance of
successfully avoiding the harm if the defendant had not been negligent was better
than even. Yet in each the damages were not the full damages that would
compensate the plaintiff for the actual loss, but such a sum discounted by the
probability (which was less than 50 per cent) that the harm would not have been
avoided even if the defendant had not been negligent. In some recent New South
Wales cases, damages were awarded for loss of a chance where the probability of
avoiding the harm was not better than even.185 Contrary to the view of Callinan J
in Naxakis,186 it should make no difference once one accepts that damages may
be awarded for loss of a chance in these cases whether the chance is estimated at
more or less than 50 per cent, as long as it is not purely speculative.
In Tram v Lam,187 Badgery-Parker acknowledged that in an earlier case188 he
himself had set too high a standard in refusing to recognise loss of a chance. He
now stated the law as being that:
when the chance which the plaintiff claims to have lost was a chance that an event would have occurred,
conferring a benefit upon the plaintiff, over the happening of which event the plaintiff had no control ...
what the law requires the plaintiff to prove on the balance of probabilities is the existence of the chance.
Upon proof of that, the cause of action is complete and the court may proceed to the assessment of
damages in the manner recognised in Malec.
His Honour distinguished a different class of case:
Where the chance lost was a chance that the plaintiff may have acted in such a way as to receive a
benefit or avert a detriment, the plaintiff must prove on the balance of probabilities that there was such a
chance and that the plaintiff would have so acted.
It is to this class of case that we now turn.
Chances Dependent on the Plaintiff’s Response
In the leading Australian case on loss of a chance, Sellars v Adelaide Petroleum
NL,189 the High Court distinguished three cases in which it was argued that proof
had been required on the balance of probabilities when what was at issue was
really the loss of a chance.190 The joint judgment of the majority of the court
accepted the distinction in Hotson between proof of causation and damages. It
said that these cases may have turned on the issue of causation, "which is
ordinarily governed by the general civil standard of proof".191 Although it noted
the criticism by Professor Waddams of the first of these cases,192 it concluded:
"When the issue of causation turns on what the plaintiff would have done, there
is no particular reason for departing from proof on the balance of probabilities
notwithstanding that the question is hypothetical."193 This also explains cases
such as where an employer has failed to provide safety equipment and the issue
has been raised as to whether the employee would have used the equipment if it
had been supplied.194 In such cases Professor Atiyah long ago pointed to the
hypothetical nature of the inquiry and its resemblance to the questions involved
in the estimation of future probabilities.195 Unless it is proved on the balance of
probabilities that the equipment would have been used and the injury averted,
the plaintiff has failed to prove that the failure caused the injury. Similarly, where
the defendant's negligence consists in failing to erect a warning sign, it is
generally required that the plaintiff establish on the balance of probabilities that
he or she would have responded to the warning in such a way as to avert the
danger.196
The issue of loss of chance was considered at some length in the English Court
of Appeal in Allied Maples Group Ltd v Simmons & Simmons,197 a solicitor's
negligence case. The case bore some similarity to Sellars, though no reference
was made to it. The outcome was, however, the same. The defendant solicitors
negligently failed to advise the plaintiffs in relation to the takeover of certain
assets. Had the correct advice been given, the plaintiffs would probably have
negotiated further with the vendor. The majority held that there was a realistic
chance that the negotiations would have been successful. The solicitors were held
liable for the loss of that chance. The leading judgment of Stuart-Smith LJ, with
which Hobhouse and Millett LJJ (as they then were) agreed on the law, though
the latter dissented on the facts, made a number of points:198
There is a distinction between positive acts and omissions. In relation to
positive acts, the question of causation is one of historical fact and must
be proved on a balance of probabilities. If so established, the fact is taken
as certain and "[t]here is no discount because the judge considers that the
balance is only just tipped in favour of the plaintiff".
Questions of quantification often depend on future uncertain events.
These are not decided on a balance of probabilities, but on the court's
assessment of the risk, which is often expressed in percentage terms.
"If the defendant's negligence consists of an omission, for example to
provide proper equipment, or to give proper instructions or advice,
causation depends, not upon a question of historical fact, but on the
answer to the hypothetical question, what would the plaintiff have done if
the equipment had been provided or the instruction or advice given. This
can only be a matter of inference to be determined from all the
circumstances. ... Although the question is a hypothetical one, it is well
established that the plaintiff must prove on the balance of probability that
he would have taken action to obtain the benefit or avoid the risk. But
again, if he does establish that, there is no discount because the balance is
only just tipped in his favour."
If the plaintiff's loss depends on the hypothetical action of a third party,
the plaintiff does not have to establish on a balance of probabilities that
the third party would have acted to confer a benefit on, or avoid a risk to,
the plaintiff.
There is no difference in principle between the chance of gaining a benefit
and avoiding a liability,
The chance of success need not be more than 50 per cent.
The distinction made by the English Court of Appeal between positive acts and
omissions cannot be completely supported.199 It is true that where there are
competing possible causes the plaintiff must prove on the balance of probabilities
that the defendant's negligence did at least contribute materially to the harm.200
But once that is established, the possibility of other causes having a like effect in
the absence of the defendant's negligence must also be taken into account.201 In
the case of a surgical operation which is only sometimes successful if done with
all due care, we cannot know, in a particular case where it is performed
negligently, whether or not it would have been successful if done without
negligence. The issues should be the same as in a case where the negligence
consists in failing to diagnose the condition or to perform the operation at all.
The other points made in the judgment in Allied Maples Group have been
followed and endorsed in many subsequent English cases.202 They are valid and
are consistent with Australian law. It has at least been assumed in cases such as
Rogers v Whitaker203 and Chappel v Hart204 that where the issue is whether the
plaintiff would have acted so as to avert the harm or detriment, this must be
proved on a balance of probabilities. This was so held in Green v Chenoweth,205
where the onus was held not to have been discharged. If the onus had been
discharged, the plaintiff would have recovered the damages in full.206 Only
Professor Waddams appears to dispute this.207 Although theoretically there is
much to be said for his view, the authority for distinguishing cases dependent on
the plaintiff's own response seems too firmly entrenched to be challenged now.
On the other hand, where what would have happened in the absence of
negligence by the defendant depends on the response of a third party that is not
completely one of that party's volition, authority favours the view that the
plaintiff may rely on loss of chance, so long as the chance is real and not purely
speculative.
Where the plaintiff's response to a failure by a medical practitioner to give
warning is in issue, some North American cases have said that this is to be
judged objectively.208 It is clear that in Australia it is judged subjectively, but as
McHugh J has pointed out, this may make little difference, since the court will
not accept the plaintiff's evidence given with hindsight unless backed up by
objective features:
Human nature being what it is, most plaintiffs will genuinely believe that, if he or she had been given an
option that would or might have avoided the injury, the option would have been taken. In determining
the reliability of the plaintiff's evidence in jurisdictions where the subjective test operates, therefore,
demeanour can play little part in accepting the plaintiff's evidence. It may be a ground for rejecting the
plaintiff's evidence. But given that most plaintiffs will genuinely believe that they would have taken
another option, if presented to them, the reliability of their evidence can only be determined by reference
to objective factors, particularly the attitude and conduct of the plaintiff at or about the time when the
breach of duty occurred.209
Policy
In a more rationally organised society there would be no medical negligence
litigation.210 People who were ill would have their needs met and be compensated
for permanent disability from a social insurance fund.211 Medical standards
would be maintained through education, guidelines, disciplinary proceedings
and, as a last resort, the criminal law.212 Disputes that occurred would be resolved
through mediation by the offices of the Health Services Commissioner or their
equivalent in each State. It seems, however, that these rational views will not
prevail for some time.213 Instead, the torts system must continue to serve the ends
of compensation, deterrence, maintenance of standards and moral judgment.214
On all these scores, there can be little doubt that the law should impose liability
for loss of a chance brought about by medical negligence. It is a real loss,
something that people would give money for.215 Corrective justice arguments
seem to require that the wrongdoer compensate the person who has suffered.216
As the House of Lords emphasised recently when abrogating the advocate's
immunity, wrongs must be righted unless there are good reasons to the
contrary.217 There are no strong distributive justice reasons for denying the
remedy beyond the fact that many people who fall ill are left without any remedy
if they cannot prove negligence.218
The article that Hedigan J in Naxakis219 found persuasive does advance
reasons of policy for denying the extension of liability to loss of chance.220 One is
obviously spurious. The article refers to two commentators and two courts that
have pointed out that loss of chance leads to statistically more wrong decisions
than right ones. In a group of 99 cases, of which only 33 would have survived,
allowing recovery for all 99 means that 66 are wrongly decided. This is like
saying that a clock that has stopped is better than one that is a minute fast, since
it is right twice a day, whereas the one that is fast is never right! Most people
would prefer the fast watch to the stopped one as being much more useful. In this
example, the defendant would, if loss of chance were denied, never pay any
compensation despite repeated acts of negligence. By requiring the defendant to
pay 33 per cent of the assessed damages to all, the defendant compensates exactly
the total damage that has been caused by negligence.
The other arguments against extension of liability have more validity. The
article contends that it would have an adverse effect on health cost containment.
This is probably true. In so far as there will be increased litigation and recovery
of damages, the costs will in most cases be borne in the first instance by the
hospital's or medical practitioner's insurer or medical defence organisation. In
Australia, it will ultimately have to be passed on to the community in increased
costs for Medicare. Nevertheless, the floodgates are unlikely to be opened. People
who are seriously ill already have all sorts of deterrents to launching litigation.
They are seldom keen to add to their existing worries the burdens and anxieties
of doubtfully successful litigation. The vast majority of adverse events in
hospitals do not give rise to any litigation at all even in the United States.221 The
same seems to apply in Australia.222 Proof of negligence is always difficult in
such cases and, where the rewards are likely to be comparatively small, litigation
will not lightly be embarked on.
It is also contended that extension of liability will increase the incidence of
defensive medicine. Some commentators think that increased care on the part of
practitioners, even if manifested in tests and procedures that would not otherwise
be undertaken, would be a good thing.223 Nevertheless, one should accept that
tests and procedures undertaken not for the benefit of the patient, but for the
protection of the medical practitioner against litigation, are expensive and not in
the community interest when funds for medical treatment are limited. It is
difficult to know what is the present incidence of defensive medicine.224 There
seems no reason why a medical practitioner should increase defensive tactics
because of the extension of liability from cases of proof on the balance of
probabilities of the actual harm to cases of loss of chance. The only plausible
theoretical explanation is that some doctors do not presently conduct tests on
patients with a less than even chance of survival, but would be induced to do so if
there was potential liability for loss of a chance. This has little realistic credibility.
One should also recognise that there might be some direct saving of costs. If
courts currently award full damages whenever the plaintiff proves on the balance
of probabilities that the harm would not have occurred and do not make any
deduction for the chance that the harm might have occurred even in the absence
of negligence, recognition of the fact that the claim is really for loss of chance
may lead to a lesser award of damages.225 The apparent view of Callinan J that
full damages will continue to be awarded in such cases is insupportable.226
Furthermore, if the law does have any real deterrent effect, medical practitioners
can be expected to be more careful. Although prolonging someone's life does not
necessarily save the community money and may even increase its costs,
preventing disability and thereby increasing productivity might actually save
costs indirectly. Certainly, such increased care can be expected to reduce the total
level of pain and suffering in the community.
Conclusion
Where a medical practitioner fails to exercise reasonable care, the aim of the law
generally is not to reposition the plaintiff as though no treatment had been given,
but as though proper treatment had been given.227 It does not matter whether the
claim lies in contract or tort. In many instances proper treatment could have done
no more than give the plaintiff a chance of cure or alleviation of a pre-existing
condition. This is something of value, something for which many people would
give money. The law should treat such a chance as worthy of protection. The
scope of the medical practitioner's duty of care should be taken to extend to not
detrimentally affecting that chance. Loss or diminution of the chance as a result
of the practitioner's negligence should be recognised as a legal injury for which
the patient may recover damages, whether the chance was greater or less than
even, as long as it was more than speculative. The court should be required to do
the best it can to assess the damages accordingly.
* George Paton Professor of Law at the Faculty of Law, the University of Melbourne.
1 Transcript of argument on special leave application in Prosser v Eagle [1999] 20 Leg Rep SL 2 (30
November 1999). See also the transcript of argument in Green v Chenoweth [1998] 19 Leg Rep SL 4
(20 November 1998).
2 See G Masel, "Damages in Tort for Loss of Chance" (1995) 3 TLJ 43 at 52.
3 Athey v Leonati [1996] 3 SCR 458 at 474, cited by Gummow J in Chappel v Hart (1998) 195 CLR 232 at
260.
4 Cf Herskovits v Group Health Cooperative, 99 Wash 2d 609, 664 P2d 474 (1983), where the claim was
brought by the patient's dependants after his death. In some ways, a Lord Campbell's Act claim
simplifies the assessment of damages, but complicates other issues: cf JH King Jr, "Causation,
Valuation, and Chance in Personal Injury Torts Involving Pre-Existing Conditions and Future
Consequences" (1981) 90 Yale LJ 1353 at 1382, n100. For the sake of similar simplicity, I shall assume
that the patient is alive at the date of the trial and that by "survival" is meant the ability to lead a
relatively normal life with earning capacity unimpaired.
5 See Breen v Williams (1996) 186 CLR 71 at 78 per Brennan CJ; but cf at 123 per Gummow J; Hotson v
East Berkshire AHA [1987] AC 750 (CA & HL) at 768 per Croom-Johnson LJ (assuming that claim
against private doctor would be in contract and one against National Health Service one would be in
tort).
6 Some of the voluminous literature on the topic is T Hill, "A Lost Chance for Compensation in the Tort
of Negligence by the House of Lords" (1991) 54 MLR 511; W Scott, "Causation in Medico-Legal
Practice: A Doctor's Approach to the 'Lost Opportunity' Cases" (1992) 55 MLR 521; E Adeney, "The
Challenge of Medical Uncertainty: Factual Causation in Anglo-Australian Toxic Tort Litigation"
(1993) 19 Mon U Law Rev 23; SR Perry, "Protected Interests and Undertakings in the Law of
Negligence" (1992) 42 Uni of Toronto LJ 247; M Lunney, "What Price a Chance?" (1995) 15 Leg Studs 1;
Hon Sir Anthony Mason, "The Recovery and Calculation of
Economic Loss" in NJ Mullany, Torts in the Nineties, LBC Information Services, Sydney, 1997, p1 at
pp32-3; H Reece, "Losses of Chances in the Law" (1996) 59 MLR 188; M Stauch, "Causation, Risk, and
Loss of Chance in Medical Negligence" (1997) 17 OJLS 205; D Hamer, "'Chance would be a Fine
Thing': Proof of Causation and Quantum in an Unpredictable World" (1999) 23 MULR 557; N
Moshinsky QC, "Loss of Chance of Successful Treatment: Naxakis v Western. General Hospital
Considered" (2000) 8 JLM 216. Other articles will be referred to in the succeeding discussion.
7 Malec v JC Hutton Pty Ltd (1990) 169 CLR 638.
8 Ibid.
9 Watts v Rake (1960) 108 CLR 158.
10 Purkess v Crittenden (1965) 114 CLR 164.
11 King, n4 above. This article was relied on extensively by Deane J in his judgment in Commonwealth v
Amann Aviation Pty Ltd (1991) 174 CLR 64.
12 [1973] 1 WLR 1 (HL).
13 See Wilsher v Essex Area Health Authority [1988] AC 1974 (HL) at 1086-91; cf Bennett v Minister of
Community Welfare (1992) 176 CLR 408 at 422-3 per Gaudron J; Chappel v Hart (1998) 195 CLR 232 at
273 per Kirby J.
14 Bendix Mintex Pty Ltd v Barnes (1997) 42 NSWLR 307 (CA), SLR 1 May 1998: ICI Australia Operations
Pty Ltd v Walsh (1997) Aust Torts Reps 81-452 (NSW CA); Wallaby Grip (BAE) Pty Ltd (in liq) v
Macleay Area Health Service (NSW CA, 18 December 1998, unreported, BC9806780), SLR [1999] 19
Leg Rep SL 2 (19 November 1999); Seltsam Pty Ltd v McGuiness (2000) Aust Torts Reps 81-547 (NSW
CA). See also The Creutzfeldt-Jakob Disease Litigation, Straddlers Groups A and C v Secretary of
State for Health (1998) 54 BMLR 104; The British Coal Respiratory Disease Litigation (QBD, Turner J,
1998,
January
as
at
summarised
unreported);
<http://wood.ccta.gov.uk/courtser/judgements.nsf/054a30dbaca8b75e8025683c004e82de/2884ed31852fd3
15 King, n4 above, at 1353-4 (drawing distinction between causation, which must be proved on balance of
probabilities, and valuation, where chances are allowed); but cf at 1394-6 (opening up question
whether all-or-nothing approach to causation should also be abandoned).
16 Sutherland Shire Council v Heyman (1985) 157 CLR 424 at 467, citing HLA Hart and AM Honoré,
Causation in the Law, 1st edn, OUP, Oxford, 1959, pp35-6; see now 2nd edn, 1985, p38.
17 The percentages cited by Lord Salmon in McGhee v National Coal Board [1973] 1 WLR 1 (HL) at 12
should have led him to this conclusion.
18 Malec v J C Hutton Pty Ltd (1990) 169 CLR 638: King, n4 above, at 1387. Cf Naxakis v Western General
Hospital (1999) 197 CLR 269 at 312-13 per Callinan J (apparently favouring loss of chance where it is
less than 51 per cent, but allowing plaintiff to succeed in full where it exceeds 50 per cent).
19 Eg, Dulhunty v JB Young Ltd (1975) 7 ALR 409; Sleiman v Franklin Food Stores Pty Ltd (1989) Aust Torts
Reps 80-266 (NSW CA). In Shoeys Pty Ltd v Allan (1991) Aust Torts Reps 81-104 (NSW CA) Priestley
JA called for law reform agencies to look at reversing the onus of proof in these cases. In the absence
of such reform, the courts themselves are ready to draw an inference of causation: Allcorp Cleaning
Services Pty Ltd v Fairweather (NSW CA, 29 June 1998, unreported, BC9804739). Rather than having
an all-or-nothing solution here too, allowing loss of chance may be the better solution. However, the
present paper is confined to considering the issue in the medical negligence context.
20 See Environment Agency (formerly National Rivers Authority) v Empress Car Co (Abertillery) Ltd
[1999] 2 AC 22 (HL) at 31 per Lord Hoffmann, cited by Gummow J in Chappel v Hart (1998) 195 CLR
232 at 256. Eg, Lothian v Rickards (1911) 12 CLR 165 at 194 per Isaacs J (whose dissenting judgment
was affirmed, Rickards v Lothian [1913] AC 263 (PC)) (actual occurrence did not come within sphere
of duty). See also The Rt Hon Lord Hoffmann, "Common Sense and Causing Loss" (1999)
(unpublished Lecture to the Chancery Bar Association, 15 June 1999) (causation seldom at issue once
one carefully defines scope of rule); J Stapleton, "Perspectives on Causation" in J Horder (ed), Oxford
Essays in Jurisprudence, 4th Series, OUP, Oxford, 2000, p61.
21 [1911] 2 KB 786 (CA).
22 Farwell LJ said that she had sustained a loss because "damage might result not only from the loss of the
opportunity of winning a prize but also from the slur upon the plaintiff in her professional capacity,
which might result in a diminution of the value of her services as an actress when she applied for an
engagement": at 797. The other members of the court did not mention this additional loss that she
might have sustained.
23 CT McCormick, Handbook on the Law of Damages, West, St Paul, Minn, 1935, chap 4.
24 Ibid, p121.
25 (1927) 27 SR (NSW) 301 (FC).
26 This latter ground of distinction is probably a correct reading of the authorised report of the case, but
reference to the Law Times report, as reproduced in the All ER Reprint, shows that the plaintiff in
Chaplin v Hicks paid a one shilling entry fee: see [1911-13] All ER Rep 224 at 225.
27 (1946) 74 CLR 127.
28 Ibid, at 143.
29 Ibid, at 135.
30 (1991) 174 CLR 64 at 133.
31 [1974] AC 207 (HL).
32 (1991) 174 CLR 64 at 104.
33 (1951) 84 CLR 377 at 411-12.
34 Cf Hotson v East Berkshire AHA [1987] AC 750 (HL).
35 Sellars v Adelaide Petroleum NL (1994) 179 CLR 332.
36 Chappel v Hart (1998) 195 CLR 232; Naxakis v Western General Hospital (1999) 197 CLR 269.
37 [1958] 2 All ER 241 (CA).
38 Ibid, at 250.
39 Ibid, at 251.
40 Ibid, at 252.
41 See at 251 per Evershed MR, at 252 per Parker LJ, at 254 per Sellers LJ.
42 (1975) 11 SASR 148.
43 (1988) 166 CLR 351.
44 Ibid, at 363 per Wilson, Toohey and Gaudron JJ, at 389 per Dawson J.
45 Ibid, at 372.
46 See also his Honour's judgment in Sellars v Adelaide Petroleum NL (1994) 179 CLR 332 at 362. The
majority in Sellars at 353-4 cited these remarks of Brennan J, but noted that they were inconsistent
with Kitchen. Cf Norris v Blake [No 2] (1997) 41 NSWLR 49 (CA) (rejecting trial judge's assessment of
damages for loss of earning capacity on basis of weighted average of career paths open to plaintiff
and requiring that most probable path be chosen, but adjusted for contingencies including those
available from other careers), legislatively affirmed in Motor Accidents Compensation Act 1999
(NSW), s 126.
47 (1988) 166 CLR 394.
48 Nikolaou v Papasavas, Phillips & Co [1988] VR 682 (FC).
49 Ibid, at 703.
50 Ibid, at 704.
51 Ibid, at 709, An added factor that is relevant is the chance of the defendant being able to pay the
damages. Little deduction need be made for this where the defendant to the original action would
have been compulsorily insured or, as in this case, was the Incorporated Nominal Defendant. Cf
Instant Nominees Pty Ltd v Redman [1987] WAR 218 at 226-7.
52 Recent applications of the principle include Golec v Scott (1995) 38 NSWLR 168 (CA); Williams (t/as
Harris Wheeler) v Bodewes (1997) Aust Torts Reps 81-449 (NSW CA); Feletti v Kontoulas [2000]
NSWCA 59 (NSW CA, 23 March 2000, unreported, BC200001286); Harwood v Gayler & Cleland (Qld
CA, 1 November 1996, unreported, BC9605391); Little v Suncorp Insurance and Finance [No 2] [1994]
2 Qd R 273; North Australian Aboriginal Legal Aid Service Inc v Liddle (1994) Aust Torts Reps 81-300 (NT
CA).
53 Allied Maples Group Ltd v Simmons & Simmons [1995] 1 WLR 1602 (CA) at 1611-12.
54 Eg, Scott v Echegaray (1991) Aust Torts Reps 81-120 (NSW CA); Murphy v Miller (NSW CA, 16 October
1998, unreported, BC9805397); Garden State Packers v Lancken [2000] NSWSC 139 (NSW SC,
Windeyer J, 31 March 2000, unreported, BC200000826); Green v Berry [2000] QCA 133 (Qld CA, 5
May 2000, unreported, BC200002130); Denkewitz v Hodgson (Qld SC, Ambrose J, 6 November 1998,
unreported, BC9805979); Sloane v McDonald & Sutherland (WA FC, 14 November 1997, unreported,
BC9706153). For England, see Motor Crown Petroleum Ltd v SJ Berwin & Co [2000] Lloyd's Rep PN
438 (Eng CA) (40 per cent chance of successful planning appeal if proper advice given).
55 Commonwealth v Amann Aviation Pty Ltd (1991) 174 CLR 64 at 119.
56 B Coote, "Chance and the Burden of Proof in Contract and Tort" (1988) 62 ALJ 761 at 768, citing Sykes v
Midland Bank Executor & Trustee Co Ltd [1971] 1 QB 113 (CA). See also Daniels v Anderson (1995)
37 NSWLR 438 (CA) at 528-9; Allied Maples Group Ltd v Simmons & Simmons [1995] 1 WLR 1602
(CA).
57 Sellars v Adelaide Petroleum NL (1994) 179 CLR 332.
58 Tran v Lam (NSW SC, Badgery-Parker J, 20 June 1997, unreported, BC9705945).
59 (1994) 179 CLR 332 at 349.
60 (1991) 174 CLR 64. This was a claim for breach of a contract that deprived the plaintiff of the chance of
a renewal of the contract.
61 (1994) 179 CLR 332 at 348.
62 Spring v Guardian Assurance Plc [1995] 2 AC 296 (HL) at 327. This dictum was approved in Allied
Maples Group Ltd v Simmons & Simmons [1995] 1 WLR 1602 (CA) at 1613. See also the discussion in
Bank of Credit and Commerce International SA (in Liq) (BCCI) v Ali (No 2) [1999] 4 All ER 83 at 112-
16.
63 Takaro Properties Ltd v Rowling [1986] 1 NZLR 22 (CA) at 62-7 per Woodhouse P (Richardson
concurring), at 68-70 per Cooke J, at 72 per McMullin J, at 74 per Somers J; Craig v East Coast Bays
City Council [1986] 1 NZLR 99 (CA) at 108-9. See also Gregory v Rangitikei District Council [1995] 2
NZLR 208.
64 Gates v City Mutual Life Assurance Society Ltd (1986) 160 CLR 1; Norwest Refrigeration Services Pty Ltd
v Bain Dawes (WA) Pty Ltd (1984) 157 CLR 149; Sykes v Midland Bank Executor & Trustee Co Ltd
[1971] 1 QB 113 (CA).
65 (1994) 179 CLR 332 at 353. Cf n56, above.
66 Ibid, at 355 (emphasis in the original).
67 Cf Waribay Pty Ltd v Minter Ellison [1991] 2 VR 391 (AD).
68 Mallett v McMonagle [ 1970] AC 166 (HL) at 176.
69 (1990) 169 CLR 638.
70 Ibid, at 643. The only difference between the majority of the High Court and Brennan and Dawson JJ,
who delivered a separate joint judgment, is that the latter thought it "undesirable for damages to be
assessed on the footing of an evaluation expressed as a percentage" because "[d]amages founded on
hypothetical evaluations defy precise calculation": at 639.
71 JG Fleming, "Probabilistic Causation in Tort Law: A Postscript" (1991) 70 Can Bar Rev 136 at 140-1
("Postscript"). See also JG Fleming, The Law of Torts, 9th edn, LBC Information Services, Sydney,
1998, p228.
72 Sellars v Adelaide Petroleum NL (1994) 179 CLR 332 at 355. See also n56, above.
73 (1960) 108 CLR 158.
74 (1965) 114 CLR 164.
75 Cf Franklins Self Serve Pty Ltd v Wyber (1999) 48 NSWLR 249 (CA) at [24]; Kessey v Golledge (1999) 30
MVR 95 (NSW CA) at 106 (both referring to "persuasive burden" on defendant to disentangle
consequences). This appears to be a misreading of Purkess v Crittenden at 171, which is cited in
support. The term "persuasive burden", though itself open to criticism (see JD Heydon & DR Byrne,
Cross on Evidence, Australian looseleaf edition, Butterworths, Sydney, [7010]), usually refers to the
legal burden, not the burden of adducing evidence. Windeyer J in Purkess v Crittenden, who had
concurred in Watts v Rake, on the previous page accepted the view of the majority that it is only the
latter burden that rests on the defendant. The position is correctly stated in Johnston v Cowra Shire
Council [2000] NSWCA 117 (NSW CA, 5 May 2000, unreported, BC200002214); see also Expokin Pty
Ltd v Graham [2000] NSWCA 267 (NSW CA, 29 September 2000, unreported, BC200005756). Cf
Bridge Printery Pty Ltd v Mestre [1999] NSWCA 342 (NSW CA, 5 October 1999, unreported,
BC9906401) (unspecified onus on defendant to show when plaintiff's heart attack ceased to
incapacitate him). Nevertheless, it may be desirable to place a legal onus on the defendant: King, n4
above, at 1390-4.
76 Cf Commonwealth v McLean (1996) 41 NSWLR 389 (CA) at 410-11. The distinction there made between
the occurrence of "an actual event", which is "an all or nothing issue", and a hypothetical event, does
not seem a valid one on the facts.
77 See Wilson v Peisley (1975) 7 ALR 571 at 574 per Barwick CJ (Watts v Rake and Purkess v Crittenden
irrelevant because existence of pre-existing condition fully made out), Cf King, n4 above, at 1390-4.
78 "If, for example, and only by way of illustration, there was a 75 per cent probability of his becoming
unemployable by reason of his back condition even if he had not contracted brucellosis and a 75 per
cent chance that that unemployability would have caused a similar neurotic condition, there was
only a 56.25 per cent chance (75 per cent x 75 per cent) that, if he had not contracted brucellosis, he
would have developed a similar neurotic condition": at 645 per Deane, Gaudron and McHugh JJ. See
also King, n4 above, at 1387-90; Hon DH Hodgson, "The Scales of Justice: Probability and Proof in
Legal Fact-finding" (1995) 69 ALJ 731 at 746-50.
79 [1970] AC 166 (HL) at 176.
80 Make v J C Hutton Pty Ltd (1990) 169 CLR 638 at 642-3 per Deane, Gaudron and McHugh JJ.
81 [1987] AC 750 (HL).
82 Reported with the decision of the House of Lords, ibid.
83 Cf King. n4 above, at 1395-6 (questioning whether accident victim probably dead on arrival at
emergency room should not still recover damages for loss of chance of being treated without
negligence).
84 See ibid, at 782 per Lord Bridge, at 785-9 per Lord Mackay, at 793 per Lord Ackner. Lords Brandon and
Goff agreed with all three. The dicta are considered below: see text at nn116-128.
85 Cf SM Waddams, "Damages: Assessment of Uncertainties" (1998) 13 JCL 55.
86 Ibid.
87 See, eg, APQ v Commonwealth Serum Laboratories [1999] 3 VR 633; AW Hurley, "Prospects of Recovery
in Negligence and under Statute for Creutzfeld[t]-Jakob Disease resulting from Human Pituitary
Gland Derived Hormone" (1996) 4 TLJ 60.
88 Cf the hypothetical blue and yellow cab (or blue and red bus) cases much discussed in the theoretical
literature on probability: eg, Justice D Hodgson, "Probability: The Logic of the Law – A Response"
(1995) 15 OJLS 51 at 59-60. The views expressed by Murphy J in TNT Management Pty Ltd v Brooks
(1979) 23 ALR 345 at 351-2 and West v GIO of NSW (1981) 35 ALR 437 at 443 are unlikely to be
followed: see the criticism in Justice DH Hodgson, "The Scales of Justice: Probability and Proof in
Legal Fact-Finding" (1995) 69 ALJ 731 at 734-5; but see Sinka v Mayne Nickless Ltd [1964] VR 524
(jury required to be satisfied as to whose vehicle caused injury, but need not identify particular
vehicle). The debate here is said to be as to the use of statistics to
prove liability, not causation: Stauch, n6 above, at 220-1 (pointing to confusion by American judge quoted
by Lord Mackay in Hotson [1987] AC 750 (HL) at 789).
89 Cf NJ Mullany, "Fear for the Future: Liability for Infliction of Psychiatric Disorder" in NJ Mullany (ed),
Torts in the Nineties, Law Book Co, Sydney, 1997, p101.
90 See text at nn109-113 below.
91 Da vies v Taylor [1974] AC 207 (HL).
92 Willis v The Commonwealth (1946) 73 CLR 105 (remarriage of widow); Williamson v John I Thornycroft
& Co Ltd [1940] 2 KB 658 (CA) (death of widow).
93 Eg, Jones v Schiffmann (1971) 124 CLR 303.
94 (1991) 174 CLR 64 at 118 ff.
95 Ibid, at 123-4. He cited in support Snell v Farrell [1990] 2 SCR 311 and Herskovits v Group Health
Cooperative 99 Wash 2d 609, 664 P2d 474 (1983), as well as Fleming, Postscript, n71 above, and JH
King Jr, n4 above, though he noted dicta in Hotson as being to the contrary.
96 Snell v Farrell [1990] 2 SCR 311. See also McGhee v National Coal Board [1973] 1 WLR 1 (HL), as
"explained" in Wilsher v Essex Area Health Authority [1988] AC 1974 (HL).
97 Above n85. See also Reece, n6 above (distinguishing between "deterministic" and "indeterministic"
cases, loss of chance being allowable in the latter); Stauch, n6 above (criticising Reece for applying
loss of chance to human volition, but also rejecting distinction between past facts and hypothetical
ones); C Miller, "Coal Dust, Causation and Common Sense" (2000) 63 MLR 763 (criticising Reece's test
of indeterministic).
98 Eg, Tran v Lam (NSW SC, Badgery-Parker J, 20 June 1997, unreported, BC9705945).
99 Sellars v Adelaide Petroleum NL (1994) 179 CLR 332. See also T Honoré, "Medical Non-Disclosure,
Causation and Risk: Chappel v Hart" (1999) 7 TLJ 1 at 6-7.
100 These percentages are indicative only: cf Davies v Taylor [1974] AC 207 (HL) at 213. Mathematical
precision is almost always spurious in such cases: see, eg, Tran v Lam (NSW SC, Badgery-Parker J, 20
June 1997, unreported, BC9705945).
101 See the quotation from Sturch v Willmott (Qld SC, Thomas J, 13 April 1995, unreported, BC9505737)
after n182 below; and Talbot v Lusby (Qld SC, Fryberg J, 14 July 1995, unreported, BC9506006), citing
the last sentence of Deane J's statement quoted in the text at n95 above.
102 Waddams, n85 above.
103 JG Fleming, "Preventive Damages" in NJ Mullany, Torts in the Nineties, LBC Information Services,
Sydney, 1997, p56 at p69. See also Torts, n71 above, p229.
104 See Todorovic v Waller (1981) 150 CLR 402 at 412.
105 Cf Cartledge v E Jopling & Sons Ltd [1963] AC 758 (HL). There has been some questioning of this
authority recently: see Nixon v Philip Morris (Australia) Ltd (1999) 165 ALR 515 at 535-6; Wilson v
Home (1999) 8 Tas R 363 (FC) at 385-6 per Evans J. Legislation in most jurisdictions also overcomes
the problem to some extent, but that legislation will not always protect plaintiffs: see Brisbane South
Regional Health Authority v Taylor (1996) 186 CLR 541.
105 Jones v Griffith [1969] 2 All ER 1015 (CA) at 1020 per Harman LJ (risk of epilepsy); G Glasgow & ME
Casey, "The Problem of Monetary Compensation for Post-traumatic Epilepsy" [1968] NZLJ 9 and 56;
Cowan v Kitson Insulations Ltd [1992] PIQR Q19 (mesothelioma).
107 J Stapleton, "The Gist of Negligence: Part II" (1988) 104 LQR 389 at 392 ff. See also Stauch, n6 above
(advocating damages for loss of chance, but not for exposure to risk).
108 Lim v Camden & Islington Area Health Authority [1980] AC 174 (HL) at 183. See also Todorovic v
Waller (1981) 150 CLR 402 at 457-8 per Aickin J.
109 RSC Ord 37, rr 7-10. See also Practice Direction (Provisional Damages: Procedure) [1985] 2 All ER 895.
There are similar rules in the County Court. For interpretation of the rules, see Hurditch v Sheffield
Health Authority [1989] QB 562 (CA); Willson v Minister of Defence [1991] 1 All ER 638; Molinari v
Ministry of Defence [1994] PIQR Q3.
110 Report on Personal Injury Litigation – Assessment of Damages (Law Com No 56, 1973), paras 239-44.
111 In its latest review the Law Commission has recommended against extending the provisions to cases of
gradual deterioration: Law Commission, Structured Settlements and Interim and Provisional
Damages (Law Com No 224, 1994), paras 5.6-5.8.
112 As of September 1996, the provision had not been used: NSWLRC, Provisional Damages (Report 78,
1996), para 3.20.
113 Ibid, paras 5.6-5.17. The Commission endorsed most of the modifications proposed by the Law
Commission in its report, op cit, n111, Pt V, but was opposed to the listing in the legislation of
matters to which the court should have regard in making its order. One such recommendation of the
Law Commission, relating to provisional damages and fatal accident claims, is already in force in
England: Damages Act 1996 (UK), s 3.
114 Cf Wardley Australia Ltd v Western Australia (1992) 175 CLR 514; Scarcella v Lettice [2000] NSWCA
289 (NSW CA, 1 November 2000, unreported, BC200006725).
115 1953 SC 125.
116 Hotson v East Berkshire AHA [1987] AC 750 (HL) at 784 per Lord Mackay, who wrongly refers to the
child as a boy.
117 [1987] AC 750 (HL).
118 The judgments of the Court of Appeal are reported along with those of the House of Lords at [1987] AC
750.
119 Ibid, at 759-60.
120 Ibid, at 760-1.
121 Ibid, at 764.
122 Ibid, at 769-70.
123 Ibid, at 782.
124 Ibid, at 786.
125 99 Wash 2d 609, 664 P2d 474 (1983).
126 [1987] AC 750 (HL) at 790.
127 (1986) 136 NLJR 1014.
128 [1987] AC 750 (HL) at 793.
129 See Fleming, Postscript, above n71, at 141. See also Veivers v Connolly [1995] 2 Qd R
326 (damages for failure to diagnose rubella discounted by 5 per cent for chance that plaintiff would have
been unable to obtain abortion).
130 (1994) 27 BMLR 107.
131 [1970] AC 166 (HL) at 176.
132 [1974] AC 207 (HL) at 212-13.
133 [1991] 1 SCR 541.
134 Hon Justice Beverley M McLachlin, "Negligence Law – Proving the Connection" in NJ Mullany & AM
Linden (eds), Torts Tomorrow: A Tribute to John Fleming, LBC Information Services, Sydney, 1998,
pl6 at pp25-6. See also K Cooper-Stephenson, Personal Injury Damages in Canada, 2nd edn, Carswell,
Scarborough, Ont, 1996, pp764-76 (Laferrière and Hotson would be persuasive, but not conclusive, in
common law Canada); Athey v Leonati [1996] 3 SCR 458 at 474 (unnecessary to consider loss of
chance doctrine and these reasons neither approve nor disapprove it).
135 [1911] 2 KB 786 (CA).
136 Above n23.
137 King is said to have drawn his ideas from LL Wolfstone & TJ Wolfstone, "Recovery of Damages for Loss
of a Chance", Personal Injury Annual 1978, p744: see TS Aagard, "Identifying and Valuing the Injury
in Lost Chance Cases" (1998) 96 Michigan L Rev 1335, n10.
138 L Perrochet, SL Smith & U Collelo, "Lost Chance Recovery and the Folly of Expanding Medical
Malpractice Liability" (1992) 27 Tort & Ins LJ 615.
139 Ibid, Appendix A. See also JD Hodson, "Annotation, Medical Malpractice: 'Loss Of Chance' Causality"
54 ALR 4th 10 (1987, as supplemented to September 2000).
140 See Roberts v Ohio Permanente Med Group, Inc, 668 NE 2d 480 (Ohio SC, 1996); Jorgenson v Vener, 616
NW2d 366 (SD SC, 2000). On the other hand, at least one legislature has overturned its courts'
decision to adopt loss of chance and has laid down a requirement of 50 per cent probability: Michigan
Compiled Laws Annotated, Chapter 600, Revised Judicature Act of 1961, s 2912a(2) ("In an action
alleging medical malpractice ... the plaintiff cannot recover for loss of an opportunity to survive or an
opportunity to achieve a better result unless the opportunity was greater than 50%.")
141 Eg, Smith v State of Louisiana, Dept of Health and Hospitals, 676 So 2d 543 at 549 (1996); Aagard, n137
above. Cf King, n4 above, at 1381-7. See MJ McMahon, "Annotation, Medical Malpractice: Measure
and Elements of Damages in Actions Based on Loss of Chance" 81 ALR 4th 485 (1990) (as
supplemented to September 2000). The weighted average method advocated by King has been
rejected in NSW in the context of damages for loss of earning capacity resulting from motor
accidents: see n46 above.
142 (1999) 197 CLR 269.
143 Naxakis v State of Victoria (Vic CA, 5 September 1997, unreported, BC9704282).
144 See counsel's argument briefly reported at (1999) 197 CLR 269 at 271. A transcript of the argument
November
at
be
found
may
on
presented
http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/other/hca/transcripts/1998/M43/l.html. See also Moshinsky, above n7, at
218.
145 [1999] VSC 389 (Vic SC, Hedigan J, 15 October 1999, unreported, BC9906720).
146 (1998) 195 CLR 232.
147 See n138 above.
148 This is doubtful: see n139.
149 These will be considered below: see text at nn220-224.
150 The injury was sustained in 1980.
151 See text at nn43-51.
152 (1992) 176 CLR 408 at 422-3 (omitted footnotes refer to Malec).
153 (1992) 176 CLR 408 at 420, citing, among others, Betts v Whittingslowe (1945) 71 CLR 637 at 649 per
Dixon J. See also her judgment in Chappel v Hart (1998) 195 CLR 232 at 238-9.
154 Above n85.
155 (1998) 195 CLR 232 at 238.
156 Ibid, at 241.
157 Ibid, at 241-2.
158 (1990) 169 CLR 638 at 642-3.
159 SM Waddams, "Causation, Physicians and Disclosure of Risks" (1999) 7 Tort L Rev 5; Hoffmann, n20
above. See also Hon Justice I Englard, "Informed Consent – The Double-faced Doctrine" in NJ
Mullany & AM Linden (eds), Torts Tomorrow: A Tribute to John Fleming, LBC Information Services,
Sydney, 1998, pl52. Cf Honoré, n99 above (court justified in overriding causal principles to vindicate
plaintiff's rights).
160 (1998) 195 CLR 232 at 252.
161 Ibid, at 258-60.
162 Ibid, at 278-9.
163 (1995) 38 NSWLR 47 (CA) at 56-7.
164 (1998) 195 CLR 232 at 274.
165 Ibid, at 288.
166 Ibid, at 289.
167 (1999) 197 CLR 269 at 272.
168 Public Trustee v Sutherland SC (1992) Aust Torts Reps 81-149 (NSW CA) at 61,141.
169 (1999) 197 CLR 269 at 277-81.
170 Ibid, at 279.
171 Ibid, at 296.
172 Ibid, at 312-13 (citation to Hippocrates omitted).
173 (1992) 175 CLR 479.
174 [1999] VSC 389 (Vic SC, Hedigan J, 15 October 1999, unreported, BC9906720).
175 (1994) Aust Torts Reps 81 -308 (NSW CA).
176 Ibid, at 61,791 per Mahoney AP,
177 WA FC, Malcolm CJ, Rowland & Wall work J J, 26 February 1997, unreported, BC9700642. See now also
Gavalas v Singh [2001] VSCA 23 (22 March 2001, unreported, BC200101238) (law will allow claim for
damages for lost chance of a more favourable outcome from treatment resulting from doctor's
negligent failure to diagnose, though precise boundaries of such claims await future determination).
178 (1994) [1995] Aust Torts Reps 81-336 (Qld SC), appeal dismissed Turner v Locher (Qld CA, 21 April 1995,
unreported, BC9505744).
179 [1995] Aust Torts Reps 81-336 (Qld SC) at 62,350.
180 Qld SC, Thomas J, 13 April 1995, unreported, BC9505737. An appeal by the plaintiff was successful in
having one head of damages increased: Sturch v Willmott [1997] 2 Qd R 310 (Qld CA). The question
ofloss of chance was not dealt with on the appeal.
181 Cf text at nn83-97 above.
182 Citing King, above n4, at 1354, 1356, 1363-4, 1368-9, 1373, 1381 et seq, and 1397.
183 Qld SC, Fryberg J, 14 July 1995. unreported, BC9506006.
184 [1995] 2 Qd R 326.
185 Tran v Lam (NSW SC. Badgery-Parker J, 20 June 1997, unreported, BC9705945) (judge declined to put
precise mathematical figure on it, but seems to have regarded the chance as small); Mclnnes v
Ahluwalia [1999] NSWSC 818 (NSW SC, Davies AJ, 11 August 1999, unreported, BC9904583)
(damages reduced by 50 per cent because chance of recovery if defendant had advised plaintiff's
mother to see specialist only 50 per cent); Bourke v MacNeil [2000] NSWCA 144 (NSW CA, 14 June
2000, unreported, BC200003177) (chance that plaintiff would have had substantial recovery if not
operated on 40 per cent and damages assessed on this basis, but judgment overturned because CA
found that on evidence plaintiff had failed to prove that he was suffering from particular condition).
186 See text after n172 above.
187 NSW SC, Badgery-Parker J, 20 June 1997, unreported, BC9705945.
188 Woods v Lowns (NSW SC, Badgery-Parker J, 9 February 1995, unreported on this point, BC9504451)
(finding that brain damage would probably not have occurred but for negligence excluded any
allowance for chance that it would have occurred anyway).
189 (1994) 179 CLR 332 at 351-3.
190 Sykes v Midland Bank Executor & Trustee Co Ltd [1971] 1 QB 113 (CA); Gates v City Mutual Life
Assurance Society Ltd (1986) 160 CLR 1; and Norwest Refrigeration Services Pty Ltd v Bain Dawes
(WA) Pty Ltd (1984) 157 CLR 149.
191 (1994) 179 CLR 332 at 353.
192 Citing Law of Damages, 2nd edn, Canada Law Book, Toronto, 1991, §13.360; and "The Principles of
Compensation" in P Finn (ed), Essays on Damages, Law Book Co, Sydney, 1992, pplO-12. See also
Waddams, n85 above.
193 (1994) 179 CLR 332 at 353.
194 Eg, Duyvelshaff v Cathcart & Ritchie Ltd (1973) 1 ALR 125.
195 PS Atiyah, Accidents, Compensation and the Law, 1st edn, Weidenfeld & Nicolson, London, 1970, ppl24-
6, referring to McWilliams v Sir William Arrol & Co [1962] 1 All ER 623 (HL). The discussion is
omitted in P Cane, Atiyah's Accidents, Compensation and the Law, 6th edn, Butterworths, London,
1999, p95, where the law is regarded as settled, unsatisfactorily, by placing the burden of proof on the
plaintiff.
196 Eg, Nagle v Rottnest Island Authority (1993) 177 CLR 423; Council of the Municipality of Waverley v
Bloom (1999) Aust Torts Reps 81-517 (NSW CA); Secretary to the Department of Natural Resources
and Energy v Harper (2000) 1 VR 133 (Vic CA) at 152-3, citing Romeo v Conservation Commission of
the Northern Territory (1998) 192 CLR 431 at [134] per Kirby J and Qantas Airways Ltd v Cameron
(1996) 66 FCR 246 (FC) at 293-4 per Lindgren J. Cf Public Trustee v Sutherland SC (1992) Aust Torts
Reps 81-149 (NSW CA) at 61,141 (contemplating possibility of treating such cases as for loss of
chance); Lilley v Alpine Resorts Commission (1998) Aust Torts Reps 81-475 (Vic CA) (where it was
held that plaintiff failed to prove what response of third party to notice would have been).
197 [1995] 1 WLR 1602 (CA).
198 Ibid, at 1609-14.
199 See Stauch, n6 above, at 219, n48.
200 See n14 above.
201 Cf Malec v J C Hutton PtyLtd (1990) 169 CLR 638.
202 Some of them are discussed in Bank of Credit and Commerce International SA (in Liq) (BCCI) v Ali (No
2) [1999] 4 All ER 83 at 110-12. See also Motor Crown Petroleum Ltd v SJ Berwin & Co [2000] Lloyd's
Rep PN 438 (Eng CA).
203 (1992) 175 CLR 479. This was noted by Callinan J in Naxakis v Western General Hospital (1999) 197 CLR
269 at 313.
204 (1998) 195 CLR 232. See now also Rosenberg v Percival (2001) 178 ALR 577.
205 [1998] 2 Qd R 572 (CA); SLR [1998] 19 Leg Rep SL 4 (20 November 1998). Cf Keeys v State of
Queensland [1998] 2 Qd R 36 (CA) at 39-40 per McPherson JA, at 41 per Davies JA, at 44 per
Moynihan J.
206 Cf Kite v Malycha (1998) 71 SASR 321 (having no doubt that plaintiff would have sought and obtained
treatment, judge refused to treat case as one for loss of chance; however, allowance should have been
made for chance that treatment would have been unsuccessful).
207 See nn192 and 85 above.
208 See Chappel v Hart (1998) 195 CLR 232 at 246 n64 per McHugh J, citing Canterbury v Spence (1972) 464
F 2d 772 at 791 and Reibl v Hughes (1981) 114 DLR 3d 1 at 16. See also the so-called "modified
objective approach" adopted in Arndt v Smith [1997] 2 SCR 539, criticised by M Mclnnes, "Failure to
Warn in Medical Negligence – A Cautionary Note from Canada" (1998) 6 TLJ 135 and by T Honoré,
"Causation and Disclosure of Medical Risks" (1998) 114 LQR 52. Cf Hollis v Dow Corning Corp [1995]
4 SCR 634.
209 Chappel v Hart (1998) 195 CLR 232 at 246. Cf Allied Maples Group Ltd v Simmons & Simmons [1995] 1
WLR 1602 (CA) at 1623-4 (considering how a third party would have acted).
210 See H Luntz, "Mrs Whitaker's Gothic Cathedral" (1996) 4 TLJ 195.
211 Cf the proposals of the National Committee of Inquiry into Compensation and Rehabilitation in
Australia (Chair: Sir Owen Woodhouse), Report (1974).
212 Cf Final Report of the Review of Professional Indemnity Arrangements for Health Care Professionals
(Chair: Fiona Tito), Compensation and Professional Indemnity in Health Care (1995). For a summary
of this report see GJ Reinhardt (1996) 4 TLJ 173.
213 Cf Law Reform Committee of Victoria, Legal Liability of Health Service Providers (1997).
214 Cf RL Abel, "A Critique of Torts" (1990) 37 UCLA L Rev 785 (summarised in (1994) 2 Tort L Rev 99).
215 Waddams, n85 above.
216 See, eg, RW Wright, "Right, Justice and Tort Law" in DG Owen (ed), Philosophical Foundations of Tort
Law, Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1995, pl59.
217 Arthur JS Hall & Co (a Firm) v Simons [2000] 3 WLR 543 (HL). See also Giannarelli v Wraith (1988) 165
CLR 543 at 588 per Deane J (dissenting).
218 Cf Frost v Chief Constable of South Yorkshire [1999] 2 AC 455 (HL) at 504 per Lord Hoffmann;
McFarlane v Tayside Health Board [2000] 2 AC 59 (HL) at 83 per Lord Steyn; T Honoré, "The
Morality of Tort Law – Questions and Answers" in DG Owen (ed), Philosophical Foundations of Tort
Law, Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1995, p73.
219 See text at n149 above.
220 See Perrochet et al, n138 above.
221 PC Weiler et al, A Measure of Malpractice, Harvard Univ Press, Cambridge, Mass, 1993, p70, Table 4.1
(ratio of negligent injuries to number of claims in NY State, 1984, more than seven to one).
222 See Tito Report, n212 above, para 2.55 ("clear that few people suffering even a highly preventable
adverse event with significant resultant disability ever sue their health professional").
223 See D Hoffman, "Doctoring the Evidence" (1990) 15 Leg Serv Bull 76.
224 See L Hancock, Defensive Medicine and Informed Consent (1993) (commissioned by the Tito
committee), who concluded that "whether or not defensive practices are beneficial or detrimental to
patient care and to the health system generally" is an "unanswered question": para 8.46. Cf MJ
Trebilcock, DN Dewees & DG Duff, "The Medical Malpractice Explosion: An Empirical Assessment
of Trends, Determinants and Impacts" (1990) 17 MULR 539 at 550-61; D Dewees & M Trebilcock, "The
Efficacy of the Tort System and its Alternatives: A Review of Empirical Evidence" (1992) 30 Osg Hall
LJ 57 at 80-1; PC Weiler, Medical Malpractice on Trial, Harvard Univ Press, Cambridge, Mass, 1991,
pp85-8, 104.
225 Cf Sullivan v Micallef (1994) Aust Torts Reps 81-308 (NSW CA), text at n175 above.
226 See text at nn172-173 above.
227 J Stapleton, "The Normal Expectancies Measure in Tort Damages" (1997) 113 LQR 257.