12 Euthanasia and the Criminal Law:
What Will Sever a Causal Link?
DAVID MALCOLM*
The dread of something after death -
The undiscover'd country from whose bourn
No traveller returns.
Hamlet, Act III, Scene 1
Introduction
Advances in modern medicine have meant that that the twilight between when
an individual enters a state of permanent unresponsiveness and death can be
extended almost indefinitely. In circumstances where there is little likelihood of
recovery, what is created is something that is after death, in practical terms, but
before medical science and law agree that death has occurred. It is in this twilight
world that medicine, law and community values have attempted to achieve some
form of reconciliation over when it is appropriate to withdraw life-sustaining
treatment. My analysis is directed to the question of causation in the context of
euthanasia and the law. The moral and legal justification, or lack of justification,
for the sanctioning of euthanasia by the State has received considerable attention
in recent years. The debate over the passage of the Rights of the Terminally Ill Act
1995 (NT) in the Northern Territory and the subsequent enactment by the
Commonwealth Parliament of the Euthanasia Laws Act 1996 (Cth), which
effectively invalidated the Northern Territory legislation, is still fresh in the
community's memory. It has been suggested that the introduction of legislation
similar to that in the Northern Territory is the culmination of a steady retreat
from the sanctity of life ethic which has, until now, been paramount in precedent
and statute.1
Courts’ Approach
In many cases the courts remain reluctant to hasten the death of an individual.
The justification for such reluctance is as much based in a moral or cultural
understanding of death as it is in the law. For example, one judge in the course of
his summing up to jury on a charge of murder, arising out of what could be
termed an act of euthanasia, said:
However gravely ill a man may be ... he is entitled in our law to every hour ... that God has granted him.
That hour or hours may be the most precious and most important hours of a man's life. There may be
business to transact, gifts to be given, forgiveness to be made, 101 bits of unfinished business which have
to be concluded.2
Even in those circumstances where a court has approved the withdrawal of life
support facilities, judges have been at pains to point out that the question is not
one of sanctioning death. As Taylor LJ said in Re J (A Minor) (Wardship: Medical
Treatment):
The court never sanctions steps to terminate life. That would be unlawful. There is no question of
approving, even in a case of the most horrendous disability, a course aimed at terminating life or
accelerating death. The court is concerned only in which steps should not be taken to prolong life.3
The perception of a retreat from the primacy of the sanctity of life has been
prompted largely by significant advances in medical technology. These have
blurred the distinction between life and death. As one New Zealand judge has
said:
With the use of sophisticated life-support systems, life may be perpetuated well beyond the reach of the
natural disease. The process of living can become the process of dying so that it is unclear whether life is
being sustained or death being deferred.4
Definition of Death
In settling on a definition of "death" to determine when a patient has "died", the
law has taken its lead from the medical profession. In 1968 a body called the
Harvard Brain Death Committee published a report in the Journal of the
American Medical Association in which the Committee noted that "responsible
medical opinion" was prepared to adopt new criteria for pronouncing death in
circumstances where an individual had suffered "irreversible coma as a result of
permanent brain damage".5 In 1977, the Australian Law Reform Commission
recommended the introduction of a statutory definition of death that included the
concept of "whole-brain death".6 That recommendation was subsequently
adopted in New South Wales,7 Victoria8 and Western Australia in relation to the
donation of human tissue for transplant.9 More recently, the courts have been
called upon to consider the effective extension of this definition to encompass
what could be termed "higher brain death" whereby the cortex has been
damaged, but the brain stem continues to function.10 The patient enters what has
been termed a "persistent vegetative state" in which, while the patient may
continue to breathe unaided, he or she remains unconscious and unresponsive. In
those decisions, the emphasis has been placed on the quality of life which the
patient can expect while he or she remains in that state, as against the argument
that he or she could be pronounced "dead". This is a significant aspect of the
ongoing discourse and one that I will return to shortly.
Freedom of Choice
Changes in medical science have also been accompanied by changes in our social
or cultural approach to death. As a community, we have seen in recent years a
greater emphasis placed on the importance of the freedom of choice of the
individual over the responsibilities of the State. In an article in The Age in
Victoria, one commentator noted that the debate over the Northern Territory
legislation:
[I]s about the limits of individual freedoms and the political power of the Baby Boomers, now at the age
when they are beginning to contemplate their mortality. Its about an ageing population and a limited
health dollar. It's about an increasingly educated population losing its awe of the medical profession.11
In the last thirty years there has been a rise in the acceptance of wide
variations in private morality and the assertion of individual freedom of action.
There has been a much greater emphasis on the rights of the individual, with
correspondingly less emphasis on the obligations of the individuals to others or to
society as a whole. Debates about moral questions in Australia are further
complicated by a number of factors including a wide diversity of beliefs and
values shared among members of our multicultural society. A common set of
moral or social values has become harder to define.
While on its face, these issues appear unconnected with euthanasia, they will
continue to influence the course of social, political and legal debate in the coming
years. The law cannot be divorced from the community to which it is applied. In
my view, in the years ahead, questions about our understanding of death and of
the "quality of life" of patients, will be raised before the courts in an ever-
increasing number. Suggestions that euthanasia should be available in respect of
a range of illnesses or disabilities raise the possibility that it may be considered a
legitimate treatment option, even for those individuals who may remain
conscious of their surroundings. The position to be adopted in relation to those
illnesses is of particular relevance. I note, for example, that the Human Rights and
Equal Opportunity Commission has estimated that within the next four years,
200,000 Australians will be diagnosed with Alzheimer's Type Dementia. This
figure will continue to increase as more and more "Baby Boomers" reach the age
of 65. While the onset of dementia is distressing for both the sufferer and his or
her family, the same questions in relation to consciousness or pain do not arise as
they do in relation to "whole-brain" death, or the onset of a persistent vegetative
state. The challenge for the law is to strike a balance between the interests of the
individual and the interests of the community.
Euthanasia
In order to understand the position that confronts the courts in determining
questions of euthanasia, it is also necessary to understand the background against
which such disputes are determined. It is trite that the administration of any
medical procedure or treatment without first obtaining the consent of the patient
may make a medical practitioner liable to criminal prosecution for assault. Where
the treatment causes the death of the patient, the practitioner may be criminally
liable for murder or manslaughter, regardless of whether he or she had obtained
the consent of the patient. In Western Australia, apart from assault and murder,
assisting a suicide is also an offence punishable by life imprisonment.12
In the context of "active euthanasia", that is, an act which is intended to bring
about the death of a patient, the position in the United Kingdom has been put
unequivocally by Lord Devlin: "If the acts done are intended to kill and do, in
fact, kill, it does not matter if a life is cut short by weeks or months, it is just as
much murder as if it were cut short by years."13
These basic principles apply regardless of the competency, the degree of
disability or the seriousness of the illness of the patient.14
In addition to the risk of criminal liability of medical practitioners or others for
actively taking steps to kill, or assist in the death of, another, in those States in
which a Criminal Code exists, the Code imposes a duty on certain individuals to
act to prevent harm to another.15 For example, in Western Australia, s262 of the
Criminal Code provides that:
It is the duty of every person having charge of another who is unable by reason of age, sickness, mental
impairment, detention, or any other cause, to withdraw himself from such charge, and who is unable to
provide himself with the necessaries of life, whether the charge is undertaken under a contract, or is
imposed by law, or arises by reason of any act, whether lawful or unlawful, of the person who has such
charge, to provide for that other person the necessaries of life; and he is held to have caused any
consequences which result to the life or health of the other person by reason of any omission to perform
that duty.
In the context of what has been termed "passive euthanasia", that is, the
omission to act to prolong a patient's life, a medical practitioner may be liable for
prosecution for murder or manslaughter under these provisions for failure to
provide "necessaries" such as respiratory aids.
Against this background, courts have attempted to identify aspects of the act or
omission leading to the death of another, which, in the case of euthanasia, would
allow an accused to avoid criminal responsibility. One of the principal areas upon
which the courts have focused is the causal link between the act or omission of
the accused and the death of the patient or family member.
Causation and Euthanasia
Causation in criminal law is a question of fact to be determined by a jury. The
jury is asked to consider, as a distinct element of the offence, whether the act or
omission of the accused could be said to have caused the death of the victim.16
The question however becomes much more difficult where, as in the case of an
act of either active or passive euthanasia, the victim's death could be attributable
to more than one cause. There has been a significant divergence in the test to be
applied in those circumstances to establish a causal link between the victim's
death and any one action or omission. In Royall v The Queen,17 McHugh J
identified four different tests that had been applied in the United Kingdom
without consistency, namely:
1. Whether the offender's act or omission is an "operating and substantial
cause" of the victim's death.18 In some texts, it has also been suggested
that the accused's actions must be more than a "de minimis
contribution".19
2. Whether the victim's death is a "natural consequence" of the offender's
act or omission.20
3. Whether the victim's death was a reasonably foreseeable consequence of
the offender's act or omission.21
4. Whether an intervening act, or novus actus interveniens, could be said to
have severed the causal link between the offender's act or omission and
the victim's death.
In Australia, a similar degree of inconsistency is evident in some of the more
recent cases on causation in criminal law. In Royall v The Queen,22 for example,
the majority of the members of the High Court adopted the first test identified by
McHugh J but also adopted different approaches to the issue of the degree of
responsibility which must be attributed to an accused in order to establish a
causal link. I do not propose discussing the decision in detail as the court was not
called upon to consider the question of causation as it applies to an act of
euthanasia. What is of significance is the divergence of approaches to the issue of
causation.
Toohey and Gaudron JJ avoided the approach of placing conditions on the
assessment of a causal link. They adopted instead the approach in Campbell v The
Queen23 in which Burt CJ said:
It would seem to me to be enough if juries were told that the question of cause for them to decide is not a
philosophical or scientific question, but a question to be determined by them applying their common
sense to the facts as they find them appreciating that the purpose of the enquiry is to attribute legal
responsibility in a criminal matter.24
Deane and Dawson JJ also cited the judgment of Burt CJ but added a
condition:
No doubt in some cases of murder it may assist the jury if the trial judge points out not only that there
must be a causal connection between the acts (or, more rarely, omissions) of the accused and the death of
the deceased, but that the causal connection must be sufficiently substantial to enable responsibility for
the crime to be attributed to the accused.25 (emphasis added)
Brennan J adopted a similar approach to Deane and Dawson JJ, without
making reference to Campbell, holding that the accused's acts or omission must
"contribute significantly" to the death of the victim.26 Adopting a more restrictive
approach, Mason CJ suggested that the initial assault by the accused must be the
"primary cause of sequential events causing death"27 (my emphasis). In an
approach that differed significantly from the other members of the court,
McHugh J concentrated on the state of mind of the offender, rather than the
degree of responsibility:
In a criminal case, a person should not be held liable for a wrongful act or omission which has caused
harm in a "but for" sense if that harm was the product of a novus actus interveniens or was not a
reasonably foreseeable consequence of the act or omission. It goes almost without saying, however, that a
person should be held liable for harm which is causally linked with his or her conduct and which he or
she intended should be brought about by that conduct.28
The same divergent approach was again evident in the more recent High Court
decision in Osland v The Queen,29 although only two members considered the
question of causation on that occasion. McHugh J referred to his reasons in
Royall as the approach to be adopted in considering issues of causation.30' Kirby J
on the other hand found that the trial judge was correct in his direction to the
jury that the accused's actions "should be a 'substantial cause of death"'.31
Inconsistency or divergence on the question of causation may be a double-
edged sword in the context of an act of euthanasia. The adoption of an approach
that depends upon the "reasonable foreseeability" of harm may mean that, even
though a patient is seriously ill, any act or omission that may hasten death would
be sufficient to sustain a causal link. On the other hand, an approach that relies
on an assessment of the "substantial", "significant" or "primary" cause of death
may allow an offender to avoid criminal responsibility if he or she could
demonstrate to a court that death was inevitable or imminent.
In the United Kingdom, the administration of pain-killers or other drugs as
part of a course of palliative care, and which have the secondary effect of
hastening a patient's death, has been found not to constitute a criminal offence,
even if the doctor knows that the death of the patient may be a likely outcome.
This proposition has been attributed by some writers to the summing up by Lord
Devlin in R v Adams (Bodkin)32 and as having been accepted by the English
courts as the doctrine of "double effect". The legal basis of the doctrine is unclear.
Professor Glanville Williams suggests that Lord Devlin may have had in mind the
first test identified by McHugh J in Royall, that is, whether the accused's actions
were a "substantial cause" of the death. Professor Williams, however, adds
somewhat disparagingly that "[w]e may applaud his attitude without enquiring
too closely into its legal basis".33
The Doctrine of Double Effect
Two principal bases have been advanced as support for the doctrine of "double
effect". The first basis, and one that is not without precedent, is more closely
associated with the accused's intention than a causal link. Courts in the United
Kingdom have accepted that an accused who does not intend, but may have
reasonably foreseen the outcome of his or her act or omission, is not necessarily
legally responsible for them. For example, in Beatty v Gilbanks,34 the Court of
Appeal found that members of the Salvation Army who regularly marched
through Weston-super-Mare, were not responsible for the violent actions of
others who gathered to watch.35 At the time that Adams was heard, this basis
also accorded with the opinion, expressed extra-judicially, of some members of
the House of Lords.36
The approach focusing on intention has attracted criticism.37 At common law,
as it applies in the United Kingdom and in some states of Australia, an intention
to commit murder may be constituted either by proof of an intention to achieve a
desired result, or, proof that the offender knew that the result was a probable or
likely outcome of his or her actions and was indifferent to that probability.38 This
second aspect has been referred to as recklessness.39 For example, the High Court
in The Queen v Crabbe40 held that:
The conclusion that a person is guilty of murder if he commits a fatal act knowing that it will probably
cause death or grievous bodily harm but (absent an intention to kill or do grievous bodily harm) is not
guilty of murder if he knew only that his act might possibly cause death or grievous bodily harm is not
only supported by a preponderance of authority but is sound in principle.41
Insofar as the doctrine of "double effect" would excuse a medical practitioner
administering drugs in circumstances where he or she knew it was likely or
probable, the approach by Lord Devlin in Adams is wholly inconsistent with that
of the High Court in Crabbe. How this conflict in the authorities will be resolved
remains to be seen. However, I suggest that the approach in Crabbe is the more
persuasive decision.
Before leaving this particular issue, I note that in those states where a Criminal
Code applies, the position is somewhat different. The concept of recklessness
cannot be taken into account in dealing with the provisions relating specifically
to murder.42 Recklessness may provide the ground for a charge of criminal
negligence.43
The Course of Illness
The second basis relates specifically to the question of causation. It is argued that
the administration of drugs to a patient over and above what is required, or the
active withdrawal of life-sustaining treatment, does not constitute an offence,
because it is not the doctor's act which causes the death of the patient, but rather
the patient's underlying illness which is the cause. The death of the patient, as a
matter of law, was the natural course of the disease. This basis was discussed at
length by High Court of New Zealand in Auckland Area Health Board v
Attorney-General.44 In that case, Mr L suffered from an extreme case of Guillain-
Barre syndrome. The effect of the illness is to sever brain functions from the rest
of the body. While Mr L continued to breathe, and his circulation continued
without assistance, he remained completely unresponsive. Mr L had existed in
that state for 12 months and there was no likelihood of recovery. The Health
Board made application for a declaration that by withdrawing life-sustaining
treatment, and allowing Mr L to die, they would not be liable for prosecution for
homicide. The question turned largely on the lawful excuse of doctors to
withdraw life-sustaining treatment in the event that it no longer served a useful
purpose in the patient's recovery. Justice Thomas endorsed the formulation of a
doctor's duty in the context of palliative care by Professor Glanville Williams in
his seminal text on criminal law:
A doctor must never do anything to actively kill his patient, but he is not bound to fight for the patient's
life forever. His duty in this respect is to make reasonable efforts, having regard to customary practice
and expectations, and in particular having regard to the benefit of the patient to be expected from further
exertions. He need not and should not crassly fix his attention upon mere heart-beats.45
Relying upon this formulation of a doctor's ethical duties, and in particular a
duty to act in the best interests of his or her patient, Thomas J explained his
analysis of the question of causation in the following terms:
Most objective observers would accept that where a life-support system which has ceased to serve any
medical purpose or benefit to the patient is withdrawn, the certain death which it had for a time arrested
would be the outcome of the original disease and not the withdrawal of the support. To hold, therefore,
that where a doctor is under no legal duty to provide that support and has a lawful excuse for
withholding it, the discontinuance of the life support is not legally the cause of death is simply to make
the law coincide with the perception dictated by good sense.46 (emphasis added)
Justice Thomas makes the question of causation conditional upon, and
secondary to, an assessment of the bona fides of the doctor's conduct. The
question is not one specifically of causation, but is more closely related to "lawful
excuse".
Patient’s Best Interests
The House of Lords adopted a similar approach in Airedale National Health
Service Trust v Bland.47 Their Lordships, however, expanded further upon the
concept of the medical practitioner withholding treatment "in the patient's best
interests". Young Anthony Bland suffered hypoxic brain damage as a result of
being crushed against crowd control barriers during a riot at the Hillsborough
football ground. As a result of his injuries, Anthony entered a persistent
vegetative state. Although he continued to breathe, he remained unconscious and
unresponsive. The bulk of his bodily functions were performed by machines or
with the assistance of hospital staff. The medical authorities, with the support of
Anthony's parents, had made application for approval to withdraw life-sustaining
treatment, thereby hastening Anthony's death. At the time of the application,
Anthony had remained unresponsive for a period of three and a half years. Lord
Goff, with whom a number of the Lords agreed, made reference to the decision of
Thomas J in Auckland Area Health Board and said:
[I]t cannot be right that a doctor, who has under his care a patient suffering painfully from terminal
cancer, should be under an absolute obligation to perform upon him major surgery to abate a condition
which, if unabated, would or might shorten his life still further. The doctor who is caring for such a
patient, in my opinion, cannot be under an absolute obligation to prolong his life by any means available
to him, regardless of the quality of the patient's life. Common humanity requires otherwise, as do
medical ethics and good medical practice accepted in this country and overseas.48
In the context of considering the question of causation, His Lordship went on
to say:
As I see it, the doctor's decision whether or not to take any such step must (subject to his patient's ability
to give or withhold his consent) be made in the best interests of the patient. It is this principle too which,
in my opinion, underlies the established rule that a doctor may, when caring for a patient, who is, for
example, dying of cancer, lawfully administer painkilling drugs despite the fact that he knows that an
incidental effect of that application will be to abbreviate the patient's life. Such a decision may properly
be made as part of the care of the living patient, in his best interests; and, on this basis, the treatment will
be lawful. Moreover, where the doctor's treatment of his patient is lawful, the patient's death will be
regarded in law as exclusively caused by the injury or disease to which the condition is attributable.49
(emphasis added)
As in Auckland Area Health Board, the question of causation is linked with a
question whether a medical practitioner has acted in the patient's best interests.
What the decisions suggest is that if the court finds that the medical practitioner
has acted against the patient's best interests, the action of the practitioner severs
the causal chain between the patient's illness and death, introducing an
intervening act which may be characterised as the cause of the harm.
Level of Patient’s Disability
What characterises the jurisprudence to this point on euthanasia and the law is
the significant level of disability or illness of the patient. Both Auckland Area
Health Board and Bland highlight the futility of continuing life-sustaining care.
For example, in Auckland Area Health Board, Thomas J noted that:
Mr L's prognosis is now hopeless. It must be concluded that his condition is irreversible ... [A] current
examination has confirmed that the degeneration is continuing and that there is no sign of
improvement.50
Hoffman LJ in Bland drew attention to the quality of life of Anthony Bland:
There is no question of his life being worth living or not worth living because the stark reality is that
Anthony Bland is not living a life at all. None of the things that one says about the way people live their
lives –well or ill, with courage or fortitude, happily or sadly – have any meaning in relation to him.51
In both cases the court was presented with a bleak prognosis of the patient's
future. In one, the patient had been in a persistent vegetative state for more than
twelve months. In the other, the patient had been in a similar state for more than
three years. It is arguable that in both cases the patient was at the extreme end of
the spectrum in terms of the seriousness of his illness. What of those situations in
which the patient remains responsive, but his or her quality of life is slowly
deteriorating, as is the case in the context of motor neurone disease?
Alternatively, what if the patient has a normal life expectancy, but his or her
quality of life is seriously affected, as is the case, for example, where the patient
suffers from severe quadriplegia or Alzheimer's type dementia?
In those cases where the patient lacks capacity to consent, or, as is more likely
the case, to direct that treatment be withheld, the courts will carefully scrutinise a
decision that is made by a person with impaired mental capacity. For example, in
Re C (adult: refusal of medical treatment)52 a 68 year old patient suffering from
paranoid schizophrenia developed gangrene in one of his feet, but refused to
consent to the amputation of his leg below the knee, notwithstanding medical
advice that his chance of survival without amputation was only 15 per cent. The
court upheld the patient's decision to refuse the treatment, but only after being
satisfied that he had comprehended the treatment information which his doctor
had given him, had believed it and had weighed it in the balance in arriving at
the decision which he had made.53
Substitute Decision-Making
In addition to contemporaneous decisions or directions given by a mentally
impaired adult, consent may be withheld or given either by the patient's court-
appointed guardian or from a written instrument executed by the patient before
he or she became incompetent.
In Australia, all states except Queensland have legislation allowing a guardian
to be appointed to manage the affairs and property of an intellectually disabled
individual. Whether the power to consent, or withhold consent, to a medical
procedure would extend to a course of action which may lead to the death of the
individual in whose interests they act is doubtful. The power has been limited in
some respects by the courts. For example, in Secretary, Department of Health and
Community Services v JWB and SMB (Marion's Case), the High Court found that
the parents of an incompetent child could not consent to her sterilisation, that
consent being outside the scope of the parental power. Mason CJ, Dawson,
Toohey and Gaudron JJ adopted as their starting point the fact that sterilisation
was "invasive, irreversible and major surgery".54 They then listed three principal
factors which justified the court's role in sanctioning the proposed procedure,
namely, the complexity of the question of consent, the involvement of complex
medical procedures and the possibility of conflict between the child's interests
and the independent interests of the parents and other family members.55 Subject
to the overriding criterion of the welfare of the child, the interests of others,
particularly the primary care giver, are relevant to the decision. The court's
involvement ensures that in the case of conflict, the interests of the child will
prevail.
Given the High Court's reluctance to allow parental consent to be given to a
procedure not designed to bring about death, it is unlikely that the court will
allow simple consent to be given by a parent or guardian for an act of active or
passive euthanasia without a court's supervision. In the absence of that consent, I
consider that the court would apply the same or similar principles to those that I
have discussed in relation to Marion's Case.
The Right to Refuse Treatment
In the case of passive euthanasia or the withdrawal of treatment from competent
adults, the starting point is the right at common law to refuse treatment. The
clearest statement of that right is contained in the judgment of McHugh J in
Marion's Case who observed that:
It is the central thesis of the common law doctrine of trespass to the person that the voluntary choices of
an adult person of sound mind concerning what is or is not done to his or her body must be respected
and accepted, irrespective of what others, including doctors, may think is in the best interests of that
particular person.56
The acceptance of this "right" at common law may also provide an excuse at
criminal law. In Western Australia, where a competent patient has been fully
informed of the options available in the context of their ongoing treatment, and
refuses to give consent, a medical practitioner is relieved of his or her duty to the
patient.57 This is particularly significant in the context of the criminal sanctions
that apply to an omission. In the absence of a duty to the patient, a medical
practitioner may not be held liable for his or her failure to provide "necessaries".58
In the United Kingdom59 and Canada,60 the courts have given recognition to
the provision of anticipatory or advance directives by individuals concerning the
method of treatment to be adopted in the event of a terminal illness before they
become incompetent. An assessment of the validity and weight of that direction
is difficult. For example, in Re: T (adult: refusal of medical treatment),61 Lord
Donaldson MR provided some guide with how best to deal with a
contemporaneous direction by a patient:
Doctors faced with a refusal of consent have to give very careful and detailed consideration to the
patient's capacity to decide at the time when the decision was made. It may not be the simple case of the
patient having no capacity because, for example, at that time he had hallucinations. It may be the more
difficult case of a temporarily reduced capacity at the time when his decision was made. What matters is
that the doctors should consider whether at that time he had a capacity which was commensurate with
the gravity of the decision which he purported to make. The more serious the decision, the greater the
capacity required. If the patient had the requisite capacity, they are bound by his decision. If not, they are
free to treat him in what they believe to be his best interests.62
Some states in Australia have enacted legislation to provide a mechanism for
competent adults to ensure that their right to refuse treatment is respected, even
after they become incompetent.63 Each model differs slightly, but what is
common is that the statement must be in the correct, prescribed written form and
witnessed by one or two other individuals, thereby providing some weight to the
anticipatory direction. In Western Australia, similar legislation was introduced
into Parliament in 1991 but not proceeded with after the Second Reading in the
Lower House.64 It was restored to the Notice Paper in 1996 and passed through
the Committee stage. It has not since been taken any further.
In the United States, further developments have accompanied the recognition
of a common law right to refuse treatment. Utilising the reference to a "right",
recent decisions have canvassed the existence of an implied constitutional "right
to die". The development is a significant one. It lends immeasurable weight to an
advance directive that treatment is to be withheld in certain circumstances.
There is no express constitutional or common law "right to die" sanctioned by
the courts in the United States. Both state Courts of Appeal and the Supreme
Court of the United States have held that the touching of another person without
his or her consent constitutes the tort of trespass or the tort of battery. In essence,
the tort has been explained as arising out of a proprietary interest of the
individual in his or her own body. For example, the Supreme Court has said that "
[n]o right is held more sacred, or is more carefully guarded, by the common law,
than the right of every individual to the possession and control of his own
person, free from all restraint or interference of others, unless by clear and
unquestionable authority by law."65
The "right" referred to by the Supreme Court has also been referred to as a
"right of self-determination".66 The notion of bodily integrity has since been
embodied in the requirement that informed consent is generally required for
medical treatment. The Court of Appeals of New York has stated the principle as
follows:
Every human being of adult years and sound mind has a right to determine what shall be done with his
own body; and a surgeon who performs an operation without his patient's consent commits an assault,
for which he is liable in damages.67
In the 1990 decision, Cruzan v Director, Missouri Department of Health,
Rehnquist CJ observed that the doctrine of informed consent had become firmly
entrenched in United States tort law.68 A right to refuse treatment, or the right to
withhold consent, with the potential that it may cause the death of the patient,
has been found to be the natural corollary of the doctrine of informed consent.69
Until the late 1970s and early 1980s refusal of treatment cases were relatively
rare. Where they did occur, they were largely based on the patient's right
constructed at common law to withhold consent. In 1976, the direction of the
development of this right underwent a reassessment. In In Re Quinlan,70 the
father of a woman who had entered what is termed a "persistent vegetative state"
following a car accident made application for judicial approval to disconnect his
daughter's respirator. The New Jersey Supreme Court granted the application on
the basis that Ms Quinlan's constitutional right to privacy, rather than a common
law right to withhold consent, allowed her to refuse or terminate treatment.71
There is no express right to privacy guaranteed by the United States Constitution.
The Court acknowledged that:
Although the Constitution does not explicitly mention a right of privacy, Supreme Court decisions have
recognised that a right of personal privacy is guaranteed under the Constitution ... Presumably this right
is broad enough to encompass a patient's decision to decline medical treatment under certain
circumstances.72
The Court however recognised that the right was not absolute and balanced it
against the state's interest in the preservation of life, proposing a "sliding scale"
whereby the state's interest "weakens and the individual's right to privacy grows
as the degree of bodily invasion grows and the prognosis dims."73
In Superintendent of Belchertown State School v Saikewicz,74 the Supreme
Court of Massachusetts relied on both a right to privacy and the doctrine of
informed consent to permit the withholding of chemotherapy from a profoundly
retarded 67 year old man.75 It has been suggested that the decisions in relation to
a right to privacy constitute a move away from the common law to a
constitutional basis, thereby suggesting the creation of hybrid or "para" right to
die.76 A careful reading of the State decisions in the United States, however,
reveals that this observation is incorrect. The extent of the right to privacy
remains uncertain. The development of the law relating to refusal of treatment
has proceeded largely on the basis of the tortious principles of trespass and
battery and the so-called right to self-determination.77
More recently, the question of a right grounded in constitutional principles has
been revived by reference to the Fourteenth Amendment of the United States
Constitution, namely, the constitutional provision that no State shall deprive any
person of his or her life, liberty or property without due process of law. In
Cruzan, the Supreme Court was called upon to decide whether the Fourteenth
Amendment created a constitutional right to refuse unwanted medical treatment.
The Supreme Court reviewed a number of its own decisions in relation to the
Fourteenth Amendment and found that: "The principle that a competent person
has a constitutionally protected liberty interest in refusing unwanted medical
treatment may be inferred from our prior decisions."78
The elevation of the ability of an individual to refuse treatment to a
constitutional right has not been accepted in any other jurisdiction, even where
similar express constitutional rights exist. What this process does reflect,
however, is the change in community attitudes which I discussed in my
introduction. These influences will continue to be brought to bear, in even greater
weight, in the coming years. How they will influence the development of the law
in Australia is a matter of speculation. One thing is certain. This is a developing
area of jurisprudence in which the courts, the medical profession and the
community have a deep and continuing interest.
* The Chief Justice of Western Australia.
1 R Magnusson, "The Future of the Euthanasia Debate in Australia" (1996) 20 Melbourne University Law
Review 1108 at 1109.
2 R v Carr reported in The Sunday Times, 30 November 1986, pi cited in J Mason & RA McCall Smith,
Law and Medical Ethics, 4th edn, Butterworths, London, 1994, p317.
3 [1992] 3 WLR 782 at 786.
4 Auckland Area Health Board v A-G [1993] 1 NZLR 235 at 245 per Thomas J.
5 Ad Hoc Committee of the Harvard Medical School, "A Definition of Irreversible Coma" (1968) 205(6)
Journal of the American Medical Association 85 at 87 cited in Magnusson, op cit, n1, at 1113.
6 Australian Law Reform Commission, Human Tissue Transplants, Report No 7, AGPS, Canberra, 1977,
paras 133-7.
7 Human Tissue Act 1983 (NSW).
8 Human Tissue Act 1982 (Vic).
9 Human Tissue and Transplant Act 1982 (WA), s24.
10 Airedale National Health Services Trust v Bland [1993] 1 All ER 821; see also Auckland Area Health
Board v A-G, op cit, n4, dealing with Guillain-Barre Syndrome.
11 G Alcorn, "Marshall Law", The Age (Melbourne), 24 May 1995, pl3 cited in Magnusson, op cit, n1,
p1111.
12 Criminal Code (WA), s288.
13 H Palmer, "Dr Adams' Trial for Murder" [1957] Crim LR 365 at 375.
14 Secretary, Department of Health & Community Services v JWB (Marion's Case) (1992) 175 CLR 218,
15 See Criminal Code (Qld), ss285-287 at 290; Criminal Code (WA), ss262-264 and 267.
16 Pagett (1983) 76 Cr App R 279 at 290-1: Royall v The Queen (1991) 65 ALJR 451 at 477 (per McHugh J).
17 (1991) 65 ALJR 451 at 478.
18 See for example Smith v R [1959] 2 QB 35 at 42-3 (per Lord Parker CJ).
19 G Williams, Textbook of Criminal Law, 2nd edn, Stevens, London, 1983, p385.
20 See for example Beech (1912) 7 Cr App R 197.
21 See for example Roberts (1971) 56 Cr App R 95 at 102 (per the court); Mackie (1973)
57 Cr App R 453 at 459 (per the court).
22 Royall v The Queen (1991) 172 CLR 378.
23 (1981) WAR 286, Royall, op cit, n22, at 470.
24 Ibid, at 290.
25 Royall, op cit, n22, at 465.
26 Ibid, at 459 citing Pagett (1983) 76 Cr App R 279.
27 Royall, op cit, n22, at 457.
28 Ibid, at 481.
29 (1998) 73 ALJR 173.
30 Ibid, at 201.
31 Ibid, at 214.
32 At first instance. Reported in H Palmer, "Dr Adams' Trial for Murder" [1957] Crim LR 365; see for
example P Skegg, Law, Ethics and Medicine, Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1984, ppl35-8; L Skene, Law
and Medical Practice, Butterworths, Sydney, 1998, p210:1 Freckelton & K Petersen (eds), Controversies
in Health Law, Federation Press, Sydney, 1999,
33 Williams, op cit, n19, p385.
34 (1882) 9 QBD 308.
35 Ibid, at 314 (per Field J).
36 See for example the speech by Lord Jowitt, then Lord Chancellor, (1950) 169 Parliamentary Debates,
(HL) 593 cited in Skegg, op cit, n32, 137.
37 A Grubb, "Commentary: Attempted Murder of Terminally Ill Patient; R v Cox" (1993) 1 Med Law Rev
232 at 233.
38 R v Nedrick [1986] 3 All ER 1.
39 See for example R v Jakac [1961] VR 362.
40 (1985) 156 CLR 464.
41 Ibid, at 469 (per the court).
42 See R v Wilmott (No 2) [1985] 2 Qd R 406.
43 R v O'Halloran [1967] Qd R 1.
44 [1993] 1 NZLR 235.
45 Williams, op cit, n19, at p279 cited in Auckland Area Health Board, op cit, n4, p253.
46 Auckland Area Health Board v A-G, op cit, n4, at 254.
47 [1993] AC 789; [1993] 1 All ER 821.
48 Ibid, at 867; 868 (per Lord Goff).
49 Ibid.
50 Auckland Area Health Board, op cit, n4, at 240.
51 Airedale National Health Service Trust v Bland, op cit, n10, at 855.
52 [1994] 1 All ER 819.
53 Re C (adult: refusal of medical treatment) [1994] 1 All ER 819 at 824.
54 Marion's Case, op cit, n14, at 250.
55 Ibid, at 251-2.
56 Ibid, at 309.
57 Western Australian Law Reform Commission, Medical Treatment for the Dying, Project No 84, (1991),
paras 1.11 and 1.12.
58 See s262, Criminal Code (WA) and discussion above.
59 Airedale National Health Service, op cit, n10; Re T (adult: refusal of medical treatment) [1991] 4 All ER
649.
60 Malette v Shulman (1990) 67 DLR (4th) 321.
61 [1991] 4 All ER 649.
62 Ibid, at 661-2.
63 Medical Treatment Act 1994 (ACT); Natural Death Act 1988 (NT); Consent to Medical Treatment and
Palliative Care Act 1995 (SA); Medical Treatment Act 1988 (Vic).
64 Medical Care of the Dying Bill 1991 (WA).
65 Union Pacific R Co v Botsford, 141 US 250 at 251 (1891).
66 See for example In re Conroy, 486 A 2d 1209 (1985).
67 Schloendorff v Society of New York Hospital, 211 NY 125 at 129 (1914) (per Cardozo J).
68 Cruzan v Director, Missouri Department of Health, 497 US 261 at 269 (1990).
69 Ibid, at 262.
70 355 A 2d 647 (1976).
71 Ibid, at 662-4.
72 Ibid, at 663.
73 Ibid, at 664.
74370 NE 2d 417 (1977).
75 Ibid, at 424.
76 A Meisel, The Right to Die, Wiley, New York, 1989, p49; see also R Dworkin, Life's Dominion: an
argument about abortion, euthanasia, and individual freedom, Knopf, New York, 1993, pp218ff.
77 See, for example, In re Estate of Longeway, 549 NE 2d 292 (1989).
78 Cruzan, op cit, n68, at 278.