20 Epilogue: Dilemmas in Proof of
Causation
IAN FRECKELTON*
Causation is routinely described by English and Australian appellate decisions as
a matter of common sense.1 However, such an analysis in practice is often
simplistic and can be unhelpful when the occasion arises for legal advice to be
given, for cases to be run in court and for issues of causation to be proved. It
broadcasts beguilingly mixed messages to expert witnesses seeking to assist
decision-makers to evaluate complex issues such as whether a breach of duty has
caused an adverse outcome or is likely to produce such an outcome. It is
dependent upon the unarticulated notion that decision-makers are able,
unassisted by rules, guidelines or explanations, to reach "the right result" about
difficult matters such as connections, influences, aetiologies and causalities by
employing some kind of wisdom or intuition. This is curial mysticism at its most
problematic.
Within this book the unlikelihood of such a felicitous outcome where the proof
offered of causation is by way of statistics is exposed, save if significant steps are
taken to assist decision-makers.2 At a practical level, the common sense test of
causation leaves proof of causation by a number of different routes difficult and
unpredictable. It fails to address the fact that the application of common sense
alone has the potential to generate multiple and variable results, some of them
wrong, in a context where consistency and correctness should be legitimate
expectations held by parties to litigation.
While proof of causation is fundamental for the resolution of almost all forms
of litigation, it. is afflicted by many theoretical and practical conundra and is the
subject of complex rules involving shifting burdens of proof, and a conceptually
problematic combination of objective and subjective tests. Much of such proof
derives from the opinions of expert witnesses. Judges and magistrates latterly
have expressed considerable concern about unacceptable levels of objectivity and
scientific rigour in such evidence.3 In the recent era, courts have stressed that
they particularly value in expert opinions the application of scientific
methodology and the expression of comprehensible and objective views on the
basis of identified and proven data. Yet in the context of causation, decision-
makers are often confronted by problems of evaluation in relation to opinions
that are not only complex, conflicting, and conceptually demanding but both
partisan and subjectively based.
Causation evidence not only demands high quality inferential reasoning on the
part of experts but also a capacity on the part of counsel to subject the opinions
of doctors, scientists, accountants and others to effective testing via cross-
examination. It offers an important example of the practical application of
scientific/medical criteria for proof as against those generally applied in the legal
context.
This chapter reviews a selection of contemporary controversies in relation to
the proof of causation. It does not purport to provide an exhaustive treatment of
the subject but, instead, focuses upon conceptual difficulties and inconsistencies
amongst them. It does so against the employment of a threefold division within
science in relation to influence and causation, a distinction being drawn amongst
"observations", "generalisations" and "explanations".
It is an aim of the chapter to explore the similarities arid differences in the
scientific/medical and legal views of proof of causation and to tease out some of
the contemporary problems experienced in relation to establishment of causation
in both civil and criminal litigation. The chapter highlights the connection
between the theoretical uncertainties attending the notion of what constitutes
causation as a matter of law, thereby building upon a number of other chapters
within this selection, as well as the difficulties in interpreting and applying
criteria for proof of causation. It argues that the outcome of such problems is an
unsatisfactory role for expert witnesses and unhelpful difficulties for fact-finders
called upon to evaluate such evidence. It contends that there is a need for clearer
tests of causation as a matter of law and for greater synchronicity between
scientific/medical criteria for proof of causation and those used in law.
Proof of Causation
Establishment by evidence that an event took place or that inferences can be
drawn about matters such as causation is the very essence of the capacity of the
prosecution to discharge its burden in criminal litigation and of plaintiffs to
discharge their burden in civil litigation. In administrative law matters, the
decision-maker needs to reach a level of "reasonable satisfaction" about issues
such as causation on the basis of "clear, cogent and exact evidence".4 The rules of
proof which govern the means by which causation can be established, as well as
the party which has the burden to prove or disprove causation, are fundamental
to the balance within the litigation system. So too is the level of satisfaction that
needs to be arrived at by decision-makers in relation to causation. This balance is
readily tilted or confused by changes to statutory and court rules, as well as by
judicial decisions about evidence, proof and procedure. The balance in both
criminal and civil trials has changed in recent decades in a number of countries.
Generally, in the criminal area, proof of facts which need to be established to
prove the guilt of the accused, such as the causation of a victim's injuries, must be
beyond reasonable doubt. However, even in this regard the distinction between
"'essential" and "non-essential" facts, "primary" and "secondary" facts, "crucial"
and "background" facts, is not easy. Just to articulate the variously termed
distinctions draws attention to the diversity of legal approaches to the issue.
In the civil area, proof is on the balance of probabilities. All important
elements of a cause of action, such as causation (as distinct from the quantum of
damages), must be established to that level of proof, save where an even higher
level is needed, such as where the allegations are tantamount to a criminal charge
and carry the potential for serious consequences for the defendant.5 However, in
some situations, proof need not reach so high a level – such as where it relates to
a potential future event, including the need for particular treatment measures or,
where it is suggested by the defence, that conduct or circumstances other than
that for which the defendant is responsible may have contributed to, or may in
due course contribute to, the plaintiff's injuries, impairment or loss of capacity to
work. Then, statistically relatively unlikely matters can be taken into account.
The difficulty is that while the past has already taken place and, in principle at
least, is knowable, the future, of its very nature, is a matter of chance, and is a far
less certain object of knowledge. To a degree it is always speculative. It is in this
context that the evidence of actuaries and epidemiologists can become relevant
both in terms of providing circumstantial evidence and in terms of interpreting
those facts which might conduce toward an inference of connectedness between
suspected causes and outcomes.
The Role of Expert Evidence
Even proof of causation in relation to matters in the past is frequently difficult,
though, especially where there have been multiple contributing factors to
something that has happened. The light of medical, scientific, accounting and
other disciplines often needs to be shone in order to contextualise and clarify the
importance of contributing factors and to distinguish between those that might
be classified as operative as against those that are "background".6 In particular,
the relativities amongst the factors and the extent to which they can properly be
designated as causative are not easily evaluated by fact-finders, frequently
needing to be the subject of complex specialised opinions, in respect of which
reasonable experts can and do differ. The extent to which matters in the past, but
to some degree manifest in consequence now, will affect the future is especially
problematic. The line between expert opinion and conjecture in this regard can be
grey indeed. This is so even where the evidence upon which such inferences can
be drawn is numerical. At one level, such evidence reassures because it looks
both certain and precise; at another it is prone to be misconstrued and can be
misleading because of its assumptions and the methodologies employed en route
to the opinions.
The controversies about the contribution of experts to enhance decision-
makers' understanding of the potential for nexus arise in part because of the need
of the courts for specialised assistance in relation to causation and influence and
in part because the assistance is a fragile commodity, prone to go awry, especially
in the context of evidence based upon statistical analyses.7 In certain
circumstances, for instance, burdens of proof shift – such as where failure to
adhere to a proper standard of care is proved and an injury follows shortly
thereafter, as well as where the doctrine of res ipsa loquitur applies.8
Sometimes, direct evidence can be given which establishes a clear connection
between an event and an outcome. Often, though, proof is arrived at via
circumstantial evidence and by expert evidence framed in terms of possibility and
probability. In toxic tort litigation, and in criminal cases where conduct
endangering life is alleged by the prosecution, epidemiological evidence falls into
this category.
In criminal charges of sexual assault, evidence from forensic physicians and
paediatricians is often prominent in establishing causation. In coronial cases and
homicide cases in the criminal domain, evidence from pathologists about cause of
death can be important for decision-making. In civil cases involving allegations
of medical negligence, evidence from other medical practitioners working in the
pertinent area generally carries weight in determining whether there has been
tortious malpractice, after which, evidence from accountants and actuaries will
address the need to evaluate the adverse financial consequences which may be
referable to the negligence. Assertions from plaintiffs that they would not have
undergone a procedure, had they been properly advised of risks is more difficult,
clearly enough having the potential to be infected by hindsight knowledge and
conscious or unconscious self-interest. In psychiatric injury cases, it is
reconstructive or projective evidence from psychiatrists and psychologists,
postulating the impact which a particular event or events has had or might have
upon the mental health of the plaintiff, upon which disagreement is often
ventilated before courts.
Scientific Views about Causation
Scientific discoveries are made at three levels:
Observations: isolated measurements or records of events. It is important
that observations be independently verifiable and that the errors of
measurement are properly reported. Facts may sometimes appear to be
related, this giving them the potential to mislead. The "observation level"
is classified as the lowest kind of scientific discovery but, of course,
nothing in science and medicine is possible without observation and
inferences based upon it. An example is the reporting and collection in a
national database of individual cases of breast cancer including
pathologists' and cytologists' reports.
Generalisations: discoveries of connections between observational
variables but without any claim that the connections are causal.
Experimental generalisations are economical ways of describing in brief
compass what otherwise might require volumes of observational data.
When they cover important and verified sets of observations in a
straightforward way, they are often called "laws of nature". A
generalisation might suggest an explanation or a causal nexus but this is
not true in general. Correlations may be false, arising from bias, or from
experimental error or from too ready an entry into causal inferences, or
from faulty methodologies. An example is the discovery that in milk duct
breast cancers a highly aggressive character and the absence of oestrogen
receptors are strongly correlated with overproduction of the HER2
protein.
Explanations: explanatory theories are the real objective of science. Once
verified, they show why the laws of nature hold true because they provide
fundamental causal connections. A single theory may explain a host of
generalisations and unify a wide variety of apparently disparate
phenomena in a context-independent way. An example is the discovery
that cells of some breast cancers multiply uncontrollably because of the
large numbers of the HER2 protein, a molecule which facilitates signalling
inside duct cells to initiate cell growth. The more common, less aggressive
ductal breast cancers do not grow by this mechanism; as in the case of
breast tissue developing at puberty, their cell multiplication is stimulated
by the release of oestrogen.
The value of making these distinctions in the forensic context lies in the way
they clarify the scientific claims and counter-claims about evidence given during
litigation. Most of the disagreement and most of the difficulty in giving proper
weight to an item of evidence is related to the differences amongst the assertions
at these three levels. Of course, the distinctions can only be applied to the
scientific content of items of evidence within the same area of science.
Determining the combined weight of items of evidence from different areas of
science is another issue altogether and is not generally a scientific question.
In 1966 Hempel9 usefully argued that two criteria exist for explanation. The
first was what he called the criterion of "explanatory relevance": "the explanatory
information adduced affords good grounds for believing that the phenomenon to
be explained did. or does, indeed occur." That information has two components,
one supplied by the scientific theory and the other consisting of auxiliary
information. He explained the relationship of providing good grounds as
implying or conferring a high probability which is not lowered by the existence
of other information. The second criterion to which he had reference was the
requirement of testability, made best known by Karl Popper as falsifiability.10
Typically within science, therefore, a theory of, for instance, causation is
regarded as explanatory if it is possible to carry out an ex post facto prediction of
the consequence of an act from the theory together with suitable conditions
antecedent to the act. The explanatory power of a theory of causation is generally
viewed as consisting in its capacity to serve as a basis for the opposite of a
prediction, a "retrodiction".
This threefold typology of discovery, as exemplified by Hempel's analysis, is
employed within this chapter to classify, where possible, the level of causation
theory advanced.
Circumstantial Evidence
An important way in which proof of matters in dispute concerning causation is
established in all forms of litigation is via the inferences that can be drawn from
circumstantial evidence. Circumstantial evidence is evidence that is suggestive of
the existence of a matter needing to be proved in a trial, but does not itself
directly bear upon it.11 Put another way. it is "evidence of circumstances
surrounding, and related to, a subject of inquiry, from which a court may reason
in order to reach conclusions about important facts in dispute", such as the
causation of deaths, injuries and losses.12 Often it is expert evidence about the
match of particles, including hairs, fibres and spicules found on the accused to
those present at the crime scene. Sometimes it is lay evidence. It is proffered in
aid of proof of causation in all areas of the law. However, such causation theories
often do not exceed simple "observation level" discoveries and risk the drawing of
faulty inferences without the presence of clear information establishing that the
factors leading to apparent connectedness are both causal and independent. Such
attempts to prove causation are often no better than conjectures based on
correlations without causal credentials (generalisation level relationships).
With good reason, circumstantial evidence has prompted anxiety on the part of
both judges and commentators. Jeremy Bentham, for instance, called for "rules
capable of rendering right decisions secure" to guard against the risks of
misestimating such evidence13 and Burrill in 1868 bewailed the "lamentable
mistakes" made by judges acting on circumstantial evidence.14 However, the
dichotomy between "direct" and "circumstantial" evidence is now generally, and
for good reason, regarded as lacking theoretical justification,15 the real issue
being the degree of probative value properly attaching to either form of evidence.
Similes seem to have been liberally employed by the courts in an attempt to
explain proof by circumstantial evidence. The New Zealand Court of Appeal, for
instance, noted that circumstantial evidence has been likened to a rope composed
of a series of cords, a sufficient number of which, taken together, may without the
others support the burden of proof, some jurors finding it supported by some
cords, others by other cords.16
In a famous passage Lord Chancellor Cairns in the English House of Lords put
the role of circumstantial evidence similarly but employed another analogy:
My Lords, in dealing with circumstantial evidence, we have to consider the weight which is to be given
to the united force of all the circumstances put together. You may have a ray of light so feeble that by
itself it will do little to elucidate a dark corner. But, on the other hand, you will have a number of rays,
each of them insufficient, but all converging and brought to bear on the same point, and when united,
producing a body of illumination which will clear away the darkness which you are endeavouring to
dispel.17
Jurors are entitled to draw an inference of guilt from a combination of facts,
none of which viewed alone would support that inference.18 Those facts may
include any number of circumstantial matters. An inference of guilt in a criminal
trial, which will have as its basis a series of findings as to causation (such as a
blow causing death), can be drawn if it is based upon primary facts which are
found beyond reasonable doubt and if it is the only inference which is reasonably
open upon the whole body of primary facts.19 An inference of guilt may properly
be drawn, although any particular primary fact, or any collection of primary facts
falling short of the whole, would be insufficient to exclude other inferences.
Australia's leading case on the use that can be made of circumstantial evidence
is the High Court decision of Chamberlain v The Queen20 in which Gibbs CJ and
Mason J (Murphy and Brennan JJ agreeing on the point) held that the process of
reasoning in a case featuring circumstantial evidence gives rise to two
possibilities of error: first from the chances of error in respect of each fact or
consideration forming the steps, and second, from the chance of error in
reasoning to the conclusion. However, they held that the various stages in the
evaluation process do not have to be disaggregated – findings on questions of
primary fact do not have to be made. From a reasoning point of view, this has the
potential to be highly problematic, as it risks unrecognised errors residing within
the inference-drawing process, such as confusing the "generalisation" and
"explanation" levels, or not recognising when facts are dependent.
In Australia, in terms of outcome from reasoning processes, it is clear that
jurors who agree in reaching the same ultimate conclusions can disagree as to
what evidence is to be accepted, or as to what inferences should be drawn from
evidence which they do accept.21
The High Court's decision in Chamberlain v The Queen22 provides a good
example of the practical difficulties. The accused mother and father were charged
with murder but the body of the allegedly deceased baby was never found. The
defence postulated that the cause of the death of the Chamberlain baby was that
it had been carried off and killed by a dingo. However, proof of causation of
death, namely by infliction of violence on the baby by the accused, remained the
burden of the prosecution, only able to be discharged by proof beyond reasonable
doubt.
There were no eyewitnesses. The prosecution case was circumstantial and
heavily dependent upon scientific evidence. Motive for the parents killing their
baby was almost completely absent. The prosecution relied on a number of
different groups of evidence: (i) evidence of foetal haemoglobin in the car of the
accused and in their camera case; (ii) evidence of likely bleeding if a dingo had
seized the baby's head and of the absence of large quantities of blood in the tent
in which the deceased had been at the time; and (iii) evidence of the condition of
the baby's jumpsuit and singlet and the arrangement of the baby's clothes when
they were found.
As it turned out, there were difficulties with the foetal haemoglobin evidence.
One of the issues requiring determination by the High Court was whether the
fact that the foetal haemoglobin evidence was flawed meant that the jury verdict
should be quashed. Chief Justice Gibbs and Mason J drew a distinction between
"crucial" (or "primary") facts and "secondary" facts, both of which have the
potential to be proved by scientific evidence:
[T]he jury cannot view a fact as a basis for an inference of guilt unless at the end of the day they are
satisfied of the existence of the fact beyond reasonable doubt. When the evidence is circumstantial, the
jury, whether in a civil or in criminal case, are required to draw an inference from the circumstances of
the case; in a civil case the circumstances must raise a more probable inference in favour of what is
alleged, and in a criminal case the circumstances must exclude any reasonable hypothesis consistent with
innocence.23
They held that it is not possible for a decision-maker in a criminal case to be
satisfied beyond reasonable doubt of an inference drawn from facts about the
existence of which he or she is in doubt.
Justice Deane held that it is not the law that a juror is precluded in all
circumstances from drawing an inference from a primary fact unless it is proved
beyond reasonable doubt. However, if a primary fact constitutes an essential
element of a crime charged, he held that a juror must be persuaded that that fact
has been proved beyond reasonable doubt before properly joining in a verdict of
guilty. He found that those bodies of evidence were cumulative:
The jury was entitled to pay regard to all of them, even if unpersuaded that any or all of them was
proved beyond reasonable doubt. Thus a conclusion that the evidence directed to showing the presence
of foetal haemoglobin in the car was persuasive only to the extent of balance of probability does not
mean that the conclusion and the evidence should be rejected as irrelevant. Even though the evidence,
viewed discretely, does no more than establish the presence of foetal haemoglobin on the balance of
probabilities, it remains part of the totality of the admissible and relevant evidence in the context of
which the ultimate question whether Mrs Chamberlain's guilt was established beyond reasonable doubt
fell and falls to be determined.24
Causation is frequently determined on the basis of inferences drawn from
primary facts. In the criminal domain, where such primary facts are essential to
the drawing of the ultimate inferences, decision-makers must be satisfied of them
in Australia beyond reasonable doubt, even before they accept expert opinions on
the subject. The fact that an alternative interpretation of a primary fact is possible
often forms the basis for appellate litigation. This highlights the importance of
accurate representation by expert witnesses of a number of matters: the reliability
of the "observations" which they have taken into account; the processes by which
they have arrived at the inferences that they have drawn; and finally, the actual
opinions which they have formed.
Expert Evidence of the Possibility of Causation
An issue that flows from Deane J's analysis, in particular, is the difficult question
of the use that can properly be made of expert and other evidence of a low order
of probative value, when such evidence contributes to the evaluation of a critical
issue such as causation in a criminal or civil case. At one level, there cannot be a
simple addition of relatively unlikely or dubious possibilities, resulting in a
beyond reasonable doubt or a balance of probabilities determination. Such a
process is vulnerable to erroneous inferences on the basis of mere observational
data, when in fact there may be alternative explanations or the data may have
relationships one to another.
Our legal system has long been mistrustful of "trial by numbers", in good part
because it may utterly miscarry. The issue has been controversial and the subject
of considerable amounts of heated academic discourse since the late 1960s. A
major fillip was given to discussion of the use of statistical proof in the courts by
the elementary misuse of statistics in the 1968 Californian decision of People v
Collins:25 It prompted Professor Laurence Tribe of Harvard Law School26 to
challenge the overt use of mathematical arguments in courts on grounds of public
policy, assuming that the criteria for probability judgments in the courts were in
principle mathematical. Shortly afterwards, though, the English philosopher
Jonathan Cohen challenged this assumption, arguing in The Probable and the
Provable in 197727 that not all reasoning about probabilities is mathematical
(Pascalian) and contending that some judgments of probability can be justified by
non-mathematical (Baconian) criteria. This resulted in a substantial debate
between Pascalians and Baconians.
Most recently, Rose LJ in the English Court of Appeal in a leading DNA
profiling case expressed anxiety about the use of "apparently objective numerical
figures" and repudiated the notion that juries should find guilt "by means of a
formula, numerical or otherwise", preferring the use of "individual common sense
and knowledge of the world".28 The debate in turn has prompted a series of
attempts to make statistical reasoning accessible and applicable to forensic
scenarios29 and the advancement of the argument from some quarters that
decision-marking by judges and jurors is, conceptually, a mathematical process.30
However, Australian, English and North American courts have exhibited
considerable anxiety about the use of statistical evidence, especially in the
context of cases where DNA profiling evidence has been proffered by the
prosecution,31 acknowledging the potential for misapprehension by lay decision-
makers of the contentions by experts of causation, association and nexus. This
has generated particular concern during the past decade in relation to the use to
be made of numerically dramatic assertions by DNA scientists of the likelihood of
positive matches between crime scene samples and samples taken from other
than the suspect. The risks that have been identified are that because of the way
in which statistical evidence is presented wrong inferences may be drawn. In
addition, because of the "numbers" involved jurors may lose sight of associated
issues such as whether or not a "victim" in whom the accused person's semen was
found consented to sexual intercourse.32 In short, there is a risk that jurors will be
overwhelmed by the statistics.
Perhaps the greatest danger is that juries will become confused or distracted by
some kinds of evidence, lay or expert, which add to the prosecution or the
plaintiff's case, but do so only at a low level or only marginally. The issue has
been grappled with in the criminal law where persons who have put others at
risk of being infected with the HIV virus have been charged with conduct
endangering injury or life.33 If the risk of infection is only one in 200, for
instance, but the consequences of such infection are dire, is the conduct, properly
analysed, conduct of criminal endangerment? Is the connection between the
intercourse and the potential for infection too remote? The question for the court
is the likelihood at the time of the intercourse of infection, incorporating for the
accused person his or her capacity to foresee such a potential. Epidemiology
evidence has been the resort of the prosecution in order to attempt to show
sufficiency of nexus between conduct and potential outcome. However, the key to
the probative value of such evidence lies in drawing a distinction between
evidence at the "generalisation" and "explanation" levels. The evidence may be
suggestive of an explanatory theory but epidemiology necessarily seeks
correlations and is tightly chained to "generalisation" level relationships.
In the civil context, epidemiology evidence does no more than suggest the
potential for a nexus between a teratogen or carcinogen and a birth defect or
cancer. It is particularly problematic. As noted previously, the evidence can
constitute an assertion about a correlation, but may have very little probative
value by reason of its level of generalisation. Viewed in another way, such
evidence can relate to the potential for such a nexus at a general level within the
population or within a particular population, but fail to factor in circumstances
personal to the plaintiff. The difficulty is at its most pronounced where the
evidence is adduced only at a general level in terms of enhanced risk of, for
instance, contraction of a disease by reason of exposure to a particular substance.
However, the problem can exist also where the statistical association of
exposure is personalised to the particular health and lifestyle circumstances of the
plaintiff. Judge Weinstein in the United States in the course of the Agent Orange
litigation defined the issue helpfully:
While it may be possible to prove, through the use of such proof as ... epidemiological evidence, that such
harm – for example cancer – can be "caused" by a particular substance, it may be impossible to pinpoint
which particular person's cancer would have occurred naturally and which would not have occurred but
for exposure to the substance.34
Judge Weinstein is not alone in identifying the potential for misevaluation of
epidemiology evidence. Two decades before his decision, Bradford Hill, a
renowned epidemiologist, stressed the risk of what might be called the
"association fallacy"35 – the confusion of association with cause. This is simply
another way of acknowledging that there is a risk of confusing "generalisation
level" discovery with "explanation level" discovery.
The issue was pointedly raised, too, in the early debates about aetiology of
AIDS. It was observed by researchers in the mid-1980s that there was a statistical
association between AIDS and the illicit use of nitrate inhalants, leading to
suggestions that such inhalants may have caused the depressed immune system
in AIDS. Only later was it realised that AIDS was caused by human
immunodeficiency virus ("HIV") and that the statistical correlation between AIDS
and usage of nitrate inhalants was in no relevant sense causative. It was simply
that a considerable percentage of those who contracted HIV and went on to
contract AIDS were homosexual and that some of them had used nitrate
inhalants.36 This was a classic example of "generalisation level" analysis being
mistaken for "explanation level".37
The risks of false imputation of causation have led to considerable concern
about the potential for courts, and in particular jurors, to misunderstand the
limits of epidemiology evidence.38 The risks identified by Hill prompted him to
develop criteria for the drawing of causal inferences in epidemiology, which have
since been applied in many legal contexts:
Statistical Association. There must be some degree of statistical
association between a cause and its effect, A strong association (large in
magnitude) is more likely to represent causation than a weak association
(small in magnitude).
Temporality. A cause must precede its effect. Strength in temporality,
such as when a cause immediately precedes its effect, supports an
inference of causation.
Biological Plausibility and Coherence. A cause and effect relationship
between exposure and disease should be biologically plausible and
consistent with other information about the disease or harm.
Dose-Response Effect. Causation is more likely if greater amounts of the
putative cause are associated with corresponding increases in the
occurrence of the disease or harm.
Consistency. When similar findings are generated by several
epidemiological studies involving various investigators, causation tends to
be supported.
Analogy. Substantiation of relationships similar to the putative causal
relationship increases the likelihood of causation.
Experimental Evidence. Causation is more likely if removing the exposure
in a population results in a decrease in the occurrence of disease or harm.
Specificity. When there is but a single putative cause for the disease or
harm, causation is supported.39
The insight behind these criteria, given that epidemiology was a very young
science when they were proposed, genuinely deserves praise. However, they do
not displace the need for rigorous, scientific scrutiny of the individual items of
epidemiological evidence brought to court. It is notable too that a new sub-
science has now been spawned within the epidemiology domain, "meta-analysis"
– the analysis of epidemiological analysis to enable the results of epidemiological
studies of different types and of different validity to be combined to produce
overall conclusions.
The admissibility and probative value of epidemiological evidence has been
considered in three illustrative cases: the English medical negligence decisions of
Vadera v Shaw40 and Loveday v Renton41 and then at length in the New South
Wales Court of Appeal decision of Seltsam Pty Ltd v McGuiness ("the Seltsam
case"),42 dealing with allegedly asbestos-caused cancer.
The English Decisions
In Loveday v Renton, the plaintiff sued Dr Renton for damages in the form of
permanent brain damage after being treated with pertussis whooping cough
vaccine. The question before the court was whether the vaccine had caused or
could reasonably have been foreseen to cause brain damage in young children.
There were four mechanisms by which the plaintiff in principle could have
suffered the brain injury as a result of the vaccine: febrile convulsions,
anaphylactic shock, neurotoxic effect and adjuvant effect. The major
epidemiology evidence was from the National Childhood Encephalopathy Study
which concluded that there was a temporal proximity between the usage of the
vaccine and the suffering occasionally of encephalopathy resulting in brain
damage. Stuart-Smith LJ held that the four biological mechanisms proposed by
the plaintiff were implausible and that the epidemiological evidence did not
establish that it was the vaccine which had caused the brain damage. He
concluded that the relative risk of 2.5 shown by the studies, a figure which
showed that it was two and a half times as likely that a person exposed to the
vaccine would contract the illness as one not exposed, was not statistically
significant. He took into account that in the revised version of the figures which
he employed, there were very few children who contracted the damage. Thus, he
concluded that the evidence was not strong enough to enable the plaintiff to
establish causation. Put another way, the evidence was at the "observational
level", falling well short of the scientific requirements for "explanatory level"
relationships.
In Vadera v Shaw the plaintiff sued her general practitioner for prescribing and
continuing to prescribe her an oral contraceptive pill. The plaintiff began to take
"the pill" in October and in November suffered a serious brain stem stroke as a
result of a thrombosis in the basilar artery, rendering her almost completely
disabled, suffering a condition known as "locked-in syndrome".
The plaintiff was initially prescribed "the pill" when her blood pressure was
somewhat raised. High blood pressure was conceded to be a contraindicator for
prescription of "the pill". She also claimed to have informed her doctor that she
suffered from migraines, another contra-indicator for the prescription of the oral
contraceptive pill. The Court of Appeal found that the trial judge had been
entitled to find on the facts that the plaintiff did not suffer from hypertension
when she was prescribed "the pill" and to decline to find that the plaintiff had a
history of headaches. It also found that the trial judge had been correct in finding
on the expert evidence that the causal relationship between "the pill" and strokes
had not been established.
It is the final matter, that dealing with the causation issue, which is of most
interest in this context.43 The trial judge concluded that it could not be
established, applying the discipline of statistics to the available figures, that the
association between a person taking the medication and that person suffering a
stroke was more than a relationship of chance. It followed (bearing in mind that
the burden of proof on this issue rested with the plaintiff) that it could not be
established on the balance of probabilities that the plaintiff suffered her stroke by
reason of the taking of the medication. He concluded that the studies adduced
before him did not establish a statistically significant connection between the
medication and strokes. What existed was a set of data established at
"generalisation level", but there was no satisfactory justification for equating it
with "explanation level" information.
The Court of Appeal upheld the trial judge's decision. Lord Justice Henry for
the court held that:
It is as common sense a conclusion as one could wish to say that if the connection between A and B
cannot be shown with confidence to be other than a coincidence, then it cannot be held on the balance of
probabilities that A caused B, This is not to allow scientists or statisticians to usurp the judge's function,
but rather to permit him to use their skills to discern a connection, or a lack of connection, between two
phenomena.44
Out of deference to arguments mounted in the case, the court looked at the
relevance of the epidemiological evidence, on the assumption that the plaintiff
did suffer from pre-existing hypertension. It noted that there was evidence that
hypertension implied a 4.6 times increased risk of cerebral thrombosis and, if
combined with oral contraception use, a 10.7 times increased risk. The court,
however, was influenced by the evidence that oral contraception was but one of a
number of risk factors for thrombosis, in fact being a weaker risk factor than a
number of others. Moreover, the mechanism of increased risk of arterial
thrombosis with oral contraceptives was unclear but was thought to be in the
promotion of the thrombosis. The Court of Appeal accepted the argument that
since the medication did not increase the risk of hypertension-related stroke
when given to a hypertensive patient, it followed that the medication had no
more causative effect in relation to a stroke when given to a hypertensive patient
than when given to a "normal" patient. This meant that the causal relationship
between the medication and a stroke is the same as in the ordinary case which, as
the court found, on the balance of probabilities could not be shown to exist. In
other words, the science employed existed at the level of generalisation,
deceptively suggestive of causation.
The Vadera decision of the Court of Appeal constituted a sophisticated and
careful analysis of the circumstances in which, amongst other things,
epidemiology evidence can assist the evaluation of facts proved to a court. It
emerged upon such analysis that significant care needed to be taken with the
expert evidence – the correlations between hypertension, contraceptive pill use
and thrombosis and also between migraines, contraceptive pill use and
thrombosis needed to be viewed discerningly. In fact, the combination of factors
left contraceptive pill use providing little by way of significant causative nexus in
the context of either hypertension or migraines.
Seltsam v McGuinness
The Seltsam decision took place against the backdrop of the High Court of
Australia having emphasised that the common law test of balance of probabilities
is not satisfied by evidence which does no more than establish a possibility of
nexus.45 As Mason J held in Tubemakers of Australia v Fernandez:46 "the plaintiff
will fail if all that he can show is that his disability might have been ... caused" by
the alleged wrongful conduct. However, expert evidence is not essential in all
situations. Findings of causal connection can be made without medical evidence
to support them47 or where the expert evidence does not rise above the opinion
that such a connection is possible.48 The key question is whether "the materials
offered justify an inference of probable connection. This is the only principle of
law. Whether its requirements are met depends upon the evaluation of the
evidence."49
The first question determined by the New South Wales Court of Appeal in
Seltsam was as to the admissibility of "possibility evidence". The primary issue
litigated on appeal from the decision of the Dust Diseases Tribunal was whether
the kidney cell cancer suffered by the plaintiff had been "caused" by his exposure
in the workplace to amounts of crocidolite. The epidemiology evidence on the
subject was equivocal. Other facts known to raise the likelihood of contraction of
the plaintiff's form of cancer were smoking and obesity. The plaintiff was a
moderate smoker and was significantly overweight. Thus, the task faced included
how to evaluate what were multiple and potentially connected causes of the
plaintiff's cancer.50
The key evidence proffered by the plaintiff was epidemiological evidence to the
effect that a person exposed to crocidolite was 1.4 times as likely to experience
renal cell carcinoma as a person not so exposed.51 Clear figures of a comparable
kind were not available either for smoking or obesity or for the combination of
them, still less for the combination of crocidolite exposure, obesity and smoking.
A significant difficulty confronted the Tribunal, therefore, in terms of the use
which it could properly make of the epidemiological evidence which to a modest
degree assisted the plaintiff's case but which, on its own, could not be said to
advance it to the point where it proved nexus between exposure and outcome on
the balance of probabilities. Framed another way, the question was whether the
correlations between the observational variables were in fact causative – was it
legitimate to move from the "generalisation level" to the "explanation level" and
to determine that a causation relationship existed between crocidolite exposure
and the contraction of renal cell carcinoma?
In the leading judgment of the Court of Appeal, Spigelman CJ held that the
fact that epidemiology evidence only establishes possibility does not preclude
admissibility. The second question determined by the court was as to the use that
could legitimately be made of "possibility epidemiology evidence". Chief Justice
Spigelman held that when evidence only goes so far as to establish possibility, it
must be weighed in the balance with other factors in determining whether or not
on the balance of probabilities an inference of causation in a particular case could
or should be drawn.52 He held that where the whole of the evidence,
incorporating the epidemiology evidence does not rise above the level of
possibility, either alone or cumulatively, an inference of causation cannot be
drawn.53
The Chief Justice found that the test for the particular case in respect of
causation was whether on the basis of primary facts it was reasonable to draw
the inference that the nexus existed on the balance of probabilities.54 He held that
evidence of possibility, including epidemiological studies, should be regarded as
circumstantial evidence which has the potential, alone or in combination with
other evidence, to establish causation in the particular case. He held that
causation, like any other fact, can be established by a process of inference which
combines primary facts like "strands in a cable" rather than "links in a chain". In
so doing, his Honour was viewing epidemiological evidence in the same way as
the New Zealand Court of Appeal, as pointed out above.55
He held that in the case before him the "primary" facts consisted in large
measure of the epidemiological studies which established that nexus could
possibly exist. This, he found, was not necessarily a bar to the plaintiff succeeding
as epidemiological studies and expert opinions based on such studies are able to
form strands in a cable of a circumstantial case,56The question was whether the
studies showed the connection between the inhalation of asbestos and renal cell
carcinoma to be "sufficiently close" to warrant a reasonable mind to conclude
that the possible cause was the actual cause.
In investigating this question, Spigelman CJ held that the issue before the court
was whether an increased risk caused or materially contributed to the injury
actually suffered. He held that the test of actual persuasion in respect of causation
does not require epidemiological studies to reach the level of a relative risk of 2.0
(namely where the incidence of contraction of cancer doubles on exposure by
contrast with that applicable without exposure), even when that is the only
evidence available to a court. However, he noted that "the closer the ratio
approaches 2.0, the greater the significance that can be attached to the studies for
the purposes of drawing an inference of causation in an individual case. The
'strands in the cable' must be capable of bearing the weight of the ultimate
inference."57
Chief Justice Spigelman applied a variant on the Hill criteria, classifying the
indicia that he set out as "uncomplicated statements of commonsense
propositions" for the interpretation of epidemiological evidence:
Strength of the Association, In general the higher the risk estimate, the less likely the finding is
a result of confounding or bias ...
Dose Response Effect. If the risk of the disease rises with increasing exposure, a causal
interpretation of the association is more plausible
Time Sequence. The exposure or risk factor must precede the disease ...
Consistency. Results from other epidemiological studies of the exposure-disease association
should be similar. If similar results are found in different populations using various study
designs, the plausibility of a causal interpretation is increased. An alternative explanation of
bias or confounding would have to be apply to each of the different studies, a highly
implausible explanation.
Biological Coherence. Does the exposure-disease association make biological sense given what is
known of the natural history of the disease? Do animal experiments support the association?
Do other types of collateral evidence support the association, such as secular trends of the
exposure factor in the disease. Unfortunately, for many diseases little is known about their
aetiologies, so the informational background by which to judge biological coherence is often
limited. Thus, failure of this broad principle does not necessarily weaken the plausibility of a
causal interpretation.
The first three principles can be applied to an individual study and used to assist the findings. The last
two principles referred to results outside their particular study and relate more to external issues of
coherence or consistency. All of the criteria or principles should be viewed as guidelines. Except, perhaps,
for time sequence, none is a necessary condition for a causal interpretation.58
He held that these criteria could be taken into account in determining whether
or not a court should infer, on the balance of probabilities that a particular
exposure caused injury in the specific case before the court. However, he noted
that while the evidence of epidemiologists with respect to the identification and
application of the criteria may be of assistance by force of their reasoning, they
did not constitute a scientific opinion which the court was bound to accept.
Significantly, too, he found that when assessing expert evidence on causation, the
legal concept of causation requires a court to approach the matter in a
distinctively different manner from that "which may be appropriate in either
philosophy or science, including the science of epidemiology. The commonsense
approach to causation at common law is quite different from a scientist's
approach to causation." ... An inference of causation for the purposes of the tort
of negligence may well be drawn when a scientist, including an epidemiologist,
would not draw such an inference,"60 A significant culture clash hereby becomes
apparent with a problem existing in terms of the use the law should make of
evidence from representatives of other disciplines, but the nature of the culture
clash is not so clear. Unfortunately, his Honour did not flesh the question out
further. It appears inherent in his analysis though that he was suggesting that the
test of at least the civil law may well be lower than that of, for instance,
epidemiology, enabling possibility evidence, when added to other forms of
evidence, to be sufficient to allow a finding of causation on the balance of
probabilities. In terms of proof, this requires very careful usage of terminology
both by the law and epidemiology – each may be using words in different ways,
opening up significant possibilities of misunderstanding, especially when the
ultimate test is formulated in terms of "common sense". However, the curious
factor is that at essence, Spigelman CJ for the court was holding that science and
the law probably had the same approach to the question at hand. So far as the
individual items of epidemiological evidence were concerned, generalisations
which might have seemed possible were not justified because the correlations
between the variables were too weak. As a matter of science, the evidence did not
even reach the level of generalisation and, definitely, in the absence of established
causal connections, the "explanation level" had not even been approached. This
coincided with the legal reasoning.
A number of aspects of the Seltsam decision are at significant variance to the
approach adopted in United States cases where even the admissibility of
possibility epidemiology evidence has been refused where it falls short of
reaching the relative risk ratio mark of 2.0. In the United States an arbitrary, but
clear, rule has been developed that the threshold for concluding that an agent is
more likely than not the cause of a disease is a relative risk of greater than 2.0. As
the Federal Judicial Center Manual on Scientific Evidence points out, "When the
relative risk reaches 2.0, the agent is responsible for cases equal in number to
those from all other background causes. Thus, a relative risk of 2.0 implies a 50
per cent likelihood than an exposed individual's disease was caused by the
agent."61 This has been applied in the context of determining the teratogenicity of
a morning sickness medication,62 the likelihood of asbestos causing colon
cancer,63 the likelihood of swine flu vaccine causing Guillain Barre syndrome,64
the likelihood of pelvic inflammatory disease having been caused by an intra-
uterine device65 and the impact of Agent Orange upon a variety of diseases
suffered by Vietnam Veterans and their offspring,66 to name just a few examples.
The advantage of such a rule is its clarity. The difficulty with an approach which
permits epidemiological evidence falling some distance short of 2.0 is that courts
will seek refuge in the imprecise language of "possibility" and "common sense"
which can result in inexact and impenetrable reasoning.
The New South Wales Court of Appeal has rejected the United States rule and
opted to factor epidemiology evidence falling short of the 2.0 relative risk ratio
into the mix of factors that can be considered in determining in civil matters
whether causation is proved on the balance of probabilities. That this approach is
fraught with difficulties is exemplified by the terms on which the Court of
Appeal itself divided on the facts, as well as by the criticisms levelled by the
majority at the trial judge, in particular that he inadequately evaluated the
complex and conflicting epidemiology evidence adduced before him.
The second important question left unresolved by the Seltsam decision is the
relevance of epidemiological evidence to the particular case, especially where the
litigant falls into the category of person with other risk factors for incurring the
disease or injury claimed to be attributable to the defendant's negligence. A
substantial series of factors personal to the plaintiff may heighten their
susceptibility. In turn epidemiology evidence can assist with evaluating the
significance of such factors and providing statistical likelihoods of the plaintiff
suffering the illness or sustaining the injury, but for the exposure to the agent.
The difficulty can be the ambiguities and uncertainties within such categories of
information.
The Bradford-Hill criteria and their variant applied by Spigelman CJ furnish a
useful set of guidelines against which to measure the probative value of
epidemiology evidence about causation. However, only two are necessary for
causal inference: temporality and statistical association, although they are not, of
course, determinative of causation. The challenge for expert witnesses, advocates
and decision-makers is to determine appropriate use of epidemiology evidence
that is at a general level, rather than personal to the individual plaintiff's
situation, and to evaluate dispassionately associations between exposure and
contraction of disease when the hard evidence is ambivalent. The New South
Wales Court of Appeal has offered few tools to grapple with this challenge.
The Temporal Dilemma
Important dilemmas exist at the heart of the proof of causation, A number of
them lie in the very tests set out by the courts for causation. Decisions have
drawn a distinction between establishing causation in different situations. When
the issue in dispute is the connection between matters in the past and the present,
the test is objective, proceeding on the basis that it is simply a matter of
discerning the nexus, using agreed methods and rules, and evaluating whether it
constitutes proof of causation. If the plaintiff cannot reach this point on the
mathematical probability of more probable than not, more than 50 per cent, they
recover nothing. This is the "all or nothing rule". By contrast, though, the law in
both England and Australia regards proof of causation between a past event and
events in the future, and compensation for them, as resting on subjective
considerations. The plaintiff is entitled to receive proportional compensation,
commensurate with the probability that they will incur a pecuniary loss.
Reconciliation between these approaches is problematic. From the perspective of
proof the evidence adduced in support of either issue is generically much the
same –expert evidence that relies inevitably upon a degree of informed
speculation. It has to be conceded, though, that particularly difficult challenges
are posed for the plaintiffs seeking to persuade decision-makers, be they judges,
jurors or magistrates, that mathematical calculations involved in the
establishment of percentile chances of loss, rather than a rule of thumb "rough
approximation", should be employed to establish future loss.
Troubled as prediction of future loss by reference to statistical likelihood is, a
conceptually preferable way of viewing the issue is to dispense with the temporal
distinction currently adopted by the law and to acknowledge the subjective,
predictive, speculative component in attributing from today's perspective, based
upon such "facts" as can be garnered for a court, that one thing caused or will
contribute to an outcome. The advantage of constructing the jurisprudential
notion of causation in this more flexible way is that it would enable a consistent
approach to causation – extending both to past and future matters, and
comprehending both determination of what occurred and calculation of damages
caused by reason of negligence. However, a consequence of such an approach
would be that even calculation of pre-trial loss of earnings would be viewed as
non-factual,67 leading to the abandonment of the "all or nothing rule" in the same
way that it is eschewed for future losses. This in turn would place additional
pressure on those seeking to assist courts in their calculation of pre-trial losses.
Proving Causation of Injuries
Fundamental to success for plaintiffs in personal injuries litigation is proof that
not only has there been a failure to adhere to a proper standard of care by the
defendant but that it has been the failure which has caused the plaintiff's injuries.
The legal burden of proving causation is a substantial one.68 In the medical
negligence context it has been described as "Herculean".69 It has also been
characterised as "the most formidable obstacle confronting healthcare
consumers".70 Justice Kirby of the Australian High Court has commented of the
issue that:
The reasons include the imprecision of, and uncertainty about, some medical conditions; the progressive
nature of others; the complexity of modern medical practice and technology; and the fact that some
mistakes, serious enough in themselves, have no untoward results which can properly be attributed to
them.71
A significant divergence on the issue has opened between the English, United
States and Australian courts. The difference has repercussions whose practical
significance is often not sufficiently recognised.72 Its genesis can been seen in the
controversial decision of Lord Wilberforce in McGhee v National Coal Board73
which was rejected by the House of Lords in Wilsher v Essex Area Health
Authority.74
In McGhee the plaintiff sued the National Coal Board on the basis of dermatitis
he had suffered after being required to clean out coal kilns. Although the working
conditions of the plaintiff were hot and dirty, the defendant failed to provide
proper washing facilities, resulting in McGhee cycling home covered in dirt and
grime. The trip home added to his potential for developing the disease. The
defendant sought to rely upon this aspect of the plaintiff's behaviour to exculpate
itself from all or any of liability for the plaintiff's dermatitis. The House of Lords
rejected the defence, holding that a defendant is liable in negligence if its breach
of duty has "caused" or "materially contributed to" an injury suffered by a
plaintiff, notwithstanding that there may be other factors that have contributed
to the plaintiff's injuries, Lord Wilberforce, agreeing in the result with the other
members of the House of Lords, advanced an important new interpretation:
[I]n the absence of proof that the culpable condition had, in the result, no effect, the employers should be
liable for an injury, squarely within the risk which they created and that they, not the [plaintiff], should
suffer the consequence of the impossibility, foreseeably inherent in the nature of his injury, of
segregating the precise consequence of their default.75
So far as the facts of the case were concerned, it is arguable that it fell into the
"observational level" of case, the correlation of cause and effect being available to
observation, enough to raise suspicion, but not necessarily actually existing.
Sufficient data simply were not to hand.
In Wilsher Lord Wilberforce's approach fell for review. A premature baby was
bom suffering from various illnesses including oxygen deficiency. A special baby
unit at the hospital was shown to have inserted a catheter twice into the baby's
vein, rather than into an artery, with the result that he received too much oxygen.
The issue was whether it had been proven by the infant plaintiff that the baby's
retinal condition (retrolental fibroplasia) had been caused by the health
authority's negligence, the issue being complicated by the fact that his condition
had a number of potential aetiologies related to prematurity. The House of Lords
overturned the application by the trial judge and by the Court of Appeal of the
presumption subsequently applied in the Australian High Court in Chappel v
Hart. It held that where a plaintiff's injury is attributable to a number of possible
causes, one of which is the defendant's negligence, the combination of the breach
of the defendant's duty and the plaintiff's injury does not give rise to any
presumption that the defendant's negligence is the cause of the plaintiff's injury.
The causal link must be proved to the requisite degree. For the infant plaintiff in
Wilsher this meant that he was unable to discharge his onus of proof to show that
it was the defendant's negligence which had caused his retinal condition.76
Again, applying the threefold typology, the evidence was equivocal. There was
the appearance that there might be a correlation between the retinal deficiency
and the oxygen deprivation but as an isolated datum it never rose above the level
of observational potential.
In the United States, a series of cases has reversed the usual burden of proof in
cases where difficulty has presented in proving which manufacturer's product
was used. The result has been that defendant manufacturers have had to show on
the balance of probabilities that the product used was not that of the
manufacturer. Where proof is lacking, damages have been apportioned on the
basis of the market share of the particular product. The approach was pioneered
in a series of cases involving Diethylstilbestrol (DES), an oestrogen hormone,77
which was discovered to cause vaginal and cervical cancerous growths in
daughters between ten and 20 years after their mothers took the drug to prevent
miscarriages.78
By contrast, while the Australian position on the issue remains somewhat
unclear, the position for the moment is that the law is much more advantageous
for plaintiffs and assists them when they encounter the logistical problem of
proving on the balance of probabilities that it was the departure from due
standards by the defendant that was responsible for their injuries.
The Australian law on the subject is best exemplified by the High Court
decision in Chappel v Hart,79 in which a series of Australian authorities on the
subject from the 1990s were applied.80 Justice Kirby held that once a plaintiff
demonstrates that a breach of duty has occurred which is closely followed by
damage, a prima facie causal connection is established and that it is then for the
defendant to show that the plaintiff should not recover damages. Generally, such
an attempt to gainsay the prima facie nexus will be via expert evidence.81
Similarly, an important aspect of the decision of Gaudron J in Chappel v Hart
was that once a physical injury has occurred to a patient, breach of a duty, such
as the duty to warn of a risk, is "treated as materially causing or contributing to
that injury unless there is 'sufficient reason to the contrary'".82 She regarded
inevitability of injury, whether or not the negligence occurred, and randomness
of injury, to which the plaintiff consented, as potential examples of "sufficient
reason". Justice Gummow, along similar lines, held that in the absence of
evidence that a breach of duty had no effect or that the injury that followed
would have occurred in spite of the absence of the breach of duty, the breach of
duty should be taken to have caused the injury.83
Justices Kirby, Gaudron and Gummow therefore appear to contemplate a
burden shifting substantively to the defendant to disprove causation of injury,
upon the proof on the balance of probabilities of preceding negligence. Justice
McHugh, however, did not go so far, only finding that an evidentiary burden
shifted to the defendant. He held that although the onus of proving breach of the
applicable standard of care, such as to provide appropriate information about
risks and side-effects of a procedure, remains with the plaintiff:
Once the plaintiff proves that the defendant breached a duty to warn of a risk and that the risk
eventuated and caused harm to the plaintiff, the plaintiff has made out a prima facie case of causal
connection. An evidentiary onus then rests on the defendant to point to other evidence suggesting that
no causal connection exists. Examples of such evidence are: evidence which indicates that the plaintiff
would not have acted on the warning because of lack of choice or personal inclination; evidence that no
alternative course of action would have eliminated or reduced the risk of injury. Once the defendant
points to such evidence, the onus lies on the plaintiff to prove that in all the circumstances a causal
connection existed between the failure to warn and the injury suffered by the plaintiff.84
Thus, from McHugh J's perspective, all that occurs upon the establishment of
both breach of a duty and subsequent injury is the transfer of an evidentiary
onus, the plaintiff being deemed to have made out a prima facie case for
connection. Justice Gummow, subsequently, in Rosenberg v Percival85 specifically
adopted McHugh J's analysis in Chappel v Hart.
In Mrs Hart's case, in the absence of evidence that the breach of duty to warn
properly had no effect on her decision to submit to the Dohlman's Pouch
procedure, or that the injury would have occurred even had the warning been
given, the breach of duty was found by Gummow J to have caused the injury.86
Justice Kirby87 adopted the same approach, as did Gaudron J.
The issue constitutes a vital dynamic in assessing the balance between the
parties in personal injuries litigation. As soon as a plaintiff can show a breach of
the duty to advise of risks, then under one analysis the burden shifts
affirmatively to the defendant to adduce evidence. If no adequate evidence is
adduced by the defendant, then the plaintiff succeeds. Alternatively, under the
analysis of McHugh J, as now accepted by Gummow J, the evidentiary burden
shifts to the defendant but the plaintiff retains the overall burden of proving that
the injuries ensuing after the operative procedure are to be attributed to the
failure to warn.88
The claimed impact of non-provision of information
Different approaches have been adopted internationally to evaluate the
protestation by plaintiffs that they would have made a different decision about a
medical procedure had they been properly informed of its risks. Again, such
evidence has the potential to have a significant impact upon the decision-maker's
determination of whether there is a causative relationship between failure to
advise of risks and the subsequent adverse outcome sustained by plaintiffs. In
some cases though there may be independent evidence that the giving of the
warning would have made no difference.89
In Canada and the United States the test is objective, focusing upon what a
"reasonable" or "prudent" patient would have done in the circumstances of the
plaintiff.90 What the individual plaintiff says that they would have done is of
little relevance. In England, where the test is subjective.91 the difficulties of
evaluating the weight to be given to a plaintiff's assertions from the statement of
claim and the witness box have been specifically acknowledged. Justice
Hutchison in Smith v Barking, Havering and Brentwood recognised too the
artificiality of the question posed in the forum of the courtroom:
Accordingly, it would, in my judgment, be right in the ordinary case to give particular weight to the
objective assessment. If everything points to the fact that a reasonable plaintiff, properly informed,
would have assented to the operation, the assertion from the witness box, made after the adverse
outcome is known, in a wholly artificial situation and in the knowledge that the outcome of the case
depends upon that assertion being maintained, does not carry great weight unless there are extraneous or
additional factors to substantiate it. By extraneous or additional factors I mean, and I am not doing more
than giving examples, religious or some other firmly-held convictions; particular social or domestic
considerations justifying a decision not in accordance with what, objectively, seems the right one;
assertions in the immediate aftermath of the operation made in a context other than that of a possible
claim for damages; in other words, some particular factor which suggests that the plaintiff had grounds
for not doing what a reasonable person in her situation might be expected to have done.92
The approach in Australia is subjective.93 The most detailed analysis of the
tools by which the standard plaintiff's assertion of causation in a failure to warn
case should be accepted by a trier of fact, namely the contention that had the
plaintiff been properly warned of the risks of a procedure, they would not have
consented to it, is the decision of the High Court in Rosenberg v Percival.94 In that
case the plaintiff was a nurse with doctoral qualifications. She submitted to an
osteotomy, but without having been warned of a remote chance that temporo-
mandibular symptoms, if already existing could be worsened, or even caused,
temporarily, by the procedure. Recalled in additional examination-in-chief, and
then cross-examined about her assertion, she held firmly to the proposition that
had she been properly warned, she would not have agreed to the procedure,
instead seeking alleviation of her mal-occlusion by other means.
The trial judge did not accept the evidence of the plaintiff and rejected her as a
credible witness. Much of the High Court's decision was devoted to analysis of
the circumstances in which it is proper for an appellate court to overturn a trial
judge's analysis of credibility, the appellate court lacking the same opportunity as
the trial court to observe witnesses and thereby to form impressions of them. The
High Court ultimately reinstated the trial judge's rejection of the evidence of the
plaintiff. However, in so doing, a number of judgments discussed the
circumstances in which this crucial aspect of proof of causation can be satisfied.
The court affirmed its earlier ruling that the test is subjective, and followed the
English approach on the subject, finding that the question to be asked is whether
the particular plaintiff would have proceeded with the procedure had she or he
been warned of material facts about the procedure.95 However, McHugh and
Kirby JJ emphasised that a trier of fact is not bound to accept uncritically
protestations by plaintiffs about the hypothetical question of whether they would
have behaved differently in respect of the proposed procedure if properly
informed about its risks. Justice McHugh held that in a case where there is no
direct evidence as to what the plaintiff would have done, an inference could be
drawn from the objective facts that the plaintiff would not have undergone the
procedure. In what he termed "exceptional cases", he found too that although a
plaintiff's testimony may be rejected as lacking credibility, an inference could still
be drawn "from the objective facts" that the plaintiff would not have submitted to
the procedure: "That inference would ordinarily be based not only on the
objective facts but also on the tribunal's assessment of the general character and
personality of the patient."96
Justice McHugh found that if a plaintiff in a failure to warn case is believed in
relation to their protestation that they would not have proceeded if properly
warned, they will succeed even though the objective facts may point the other
way. However, if the evidence of the plaintiff is rejected, he or she "carries the
heavy evidentiary burden of persuading the court to make a favourable finding
on the causation issue solely by reference to the objective facts and
probabilities,"97 He held that the critical fact is whether the patient would have
taken action – refusing to have the operation – that would have avoided the
harm suffered. But he observed that that fact can only be determined by making
an "anterior finding" as to what the patient would have decided to do, if given the
relevant warning:
It is not possible to find what the patient would have done without deciding, expressiy or by necessary
implication, what decision the patient would have made, if the proper warning had been given. If the
court finds that the patient would have decided not to have the operation, it concludes that he or she
would not have had the operation. What the patient would have decided and what the patient would
have done are hypothetical questions. But one relates to a hypothetical mental state and the other to a
hypothetical course of action. The answer concerning the hypothetical mental state provides the answer
to the hypothetical course of action. The onus is on the patient to prove that he or she would have
decided not to have the operation if given a warning of the risk of harm. That means that the patient
must prove what he or she would have decided to do. When the direct testimony of that person on the
causation issue has been rejected, it is unlikely, as a matter of fact, that the patient will succeed on that
issue unless the objective evidence in favour of the patient is very strong.98
Justice Gummow, examining the same question, noted that the credibility of a
plaintiff's contention as to what he or she would have done if properly apprised
of the risks of a procedure will both be hypothetical and will be "affected, no
matter how honest he is, by his own particular experience."99 Justice Kirby
expressed a similar view, finding that courts could be trusted to reject self-
interested assertions, lacking in credibility, but acknowledged the "practical
problems" of the exercise, and recognised the practicalities of the scenario:
Allowing that the patient concerned is sufficiently disappointed with the outcome of some healthcare
procedure that he or she has ventured upon expensive, time-consuming and stressful litigation to obtain
redress, it is scarcely conceivable that such a patient would destroy the case by equivocating in evidence
over such a matter.100
The result of the various judicial analyses in Rosenberg v Percival is that the
subjective test remains ascendant in Australia, as in England, but that courts will
be guided consistently, not so much by what can be expected to be self-serving
assertions by plaintiffs that if they had been properly advised they would have
behaved differently, but by what medical evidence establishes were the real
options for plaintiffs at the time that they underwent the procedure. If expert
evidence establishes that a particular plaintiff had little option but to submit to
the procedure, the chain of causation flowing from the negligent non-disclosure
is likely to be regarded as broken. The uncertain scenarios will be where plaintiffs
maintain that even at a risk to themselves they would have delayed the procedure
or, perhaps, sought to have it performed by another professional who may have
run a lower risk of the complication of which they were not advised by reason of
the other professional's skill and competence. Much will depend on the decision-
maker's assessment of whether such a delay or a procedure undertaken by
different hands would have made any difference to the outcome for the patient
and therefore whether the adverse sequelae in fact experienced were attributable
to the negligent non-disclosure.
Evaluation of the Causation of Psychiatric Injuries
One of the most difficult issues faced by plaintiffs in psychiatric injury cases lies
in proving that a single tortious act caused or at least materially contributed to
the current state of a plaintiff's psychiatric condition. Frequently, plaintiffs in
sexual assault claims, for instance, have been reared in circumstances of familial
dysfunction. They may have been the victims of childhood sexual or physical
abuse. In their teenage years they may have exhibited signs of a conduct disorder,
incorporating self-harming behaviours, such as self-mutilation, substance abuse,
and precocious sexual activity, or impaired learning performance and difficulties
with authorities, such as law enforcement personnel. Whether or not their
allegation is that they were sexually assaulted during their childhood or adult
years, attribution of causation from a trigger to their adult psychiatric and
psychological condition becomes extremely problematic, to the point often of
bordering on the arbitrary and the capricious.
Again, the threefold typology can offer conceptual assistance. The mere
existence of a wrongful behaviour by a defendant and a subsequent psychiatric
condition does not take matters beyond the "observational level". From a
scientific perspective, more is necessary. Unfortunately, the research necessary to
establish the connections at the generalisation level has not yet been
performed.101
Additional aspects of difficulty which regularly present to fact-finders are
when a plaintiff maintains that he or she was sexually or physically assaulted
over an extensive period of time but is only able to pinpoint a modest number of
specific incidents with sufficient particularity for them to be properly alleged in a
statement of claim. Another common problem is where incidents comparable to
those the subject of the litigation occurred prior to or subsequent to those alleged
in the litigation. The question arises of the extent to which, therefore, there is a
pre-existing condition, prodromal condition or a subsequent condition which
complicates assessment of the extent to which the tortious incident is responsible
for the plaintiff's condition as now identifiable.
A plaintiff is entitled to be compensated for the injury caused to them by a
tortious act. The "talem qualem rule" provides that a defendant is liable to
compensate a plaintiff even though the defendant's wrongful conduct has caused
harm of an extent which they could not have foreseen. So long as the defendant
could reasonably have foreseen that his or her conduct would be likely to cause
some damage to a victim, the defendant is liable to compensate the victim, taking
the victim as they are at the time of the tortious action inflicting injury.102
Where the action of a tortfeasor renders symptomatic a latent or degenerative
condition that was previously asymptomatic, or aggravates a previously
symptomatic condition, the tortfeasor will be held liable for that condition, but
the fact that the condition was present and would in due course have become
symptomatic must be taken into account. Thus, in Wilson v Peisly103 Barwick CJ
held that:
The trauma of the accident for which the appellant was responsible no doubt made a present reality of
that which was ever a real possibility. Thus, whilst the appellant must pay for bringing out that
condition, what he must pay must, in my opinion, justly reflect the fact that that condition was not
merely latent in the respondent but that events, not of an unusual or unlikely kind, could and might in
the ordinary course of life have evoked that condition had not the appellant's negligence intervened.
It is thus necessary in Australia to assess the damages in respect of the
bringing on of a latent disorder by considering its onset following the accident
compared with its hypothetical onset had the accident not occurred, applying the
principles set down by Deane, Gaudron and McHugh JJ in Malec v JC Hutton Ply
Ltd104 and discounting the award of damages to take account of the probability of
onset in any event105 (see below).
Where the plaintiff suffered from a pre-existing anxiety, depressive or other
psychiatric condition, the pecuniary entitlement of the successful plaintiff is
calculated by reference to the extent to which the tortious act exacerbated their
previous condition. If the plaintiff's life circumstances simply rendered them
vulnerable to a particularly adverse response to the tortious act, that is
unfortunate for the tortfeasor – the tortfeasor must take his or her victims as they
come, sometimes unusually resilient, sometimes with an egg-shell psyche.
However, such an articulation of conventional legal principle can be beguiling. At
the practical level of proof, the assessment of the distinction between pre-existing
vulnerability and preexisting illness can be a fine one. It is at its most difficult, as
indicated above, where it is contended by the defendant that the plaintiff was
previously prodromal or would have developed their subsequent condition,
regardless of the commission of the tort by the tortfeasor.
A typical case involving complexity of causes occurred in the Victorian
criminal injuries compensation case of Martin v Crimes Compensation
Tribunal.106 The applicant for compensation had lived for some time in an
abusive relationship with a man who was an amphetamine addict, subject to
worsening paranoias and to considerable lability of mood. He had threatened a
murder-suicide on a number of occasions. One night he returned to the home
from which he had been excluded by his de facto wife, was heavily intoxicated,
mostly by amphetamines, and was hallucinatory and delusional. He insisted on
staying with his children for the night. When his de facto wife arose in the
morning, after only a very short period of sleep, she found him acting eerily and
surrounded by weapons with their children within arms' reach. She panicked and
ran for help, fearing all the while that he would plunge one of the weapons into
her back. As it turned out, he neither did her nor their children any physical
harm. It was for the trauma arising from this incident for which she applied for
compensation. But he had been violent toward his wife on many occasions
previously and some months later than the incident the subject of the application
again persuaded her that he had turned over a new leaf. He returned temporarily
to cohabit with the applicant before becoming violent again and being excluded
from the family home once more. A particularly difficult issue of proof arose in
the context of evaluating the extent to which the applicant's psychiatric
symptoms were attributable to one incident which, while it had particularly
frightening and memorable characteristics, was just one in a substantial sequence
of acts of violence perpetrated against the plaintiff. The difficulty would have
been even more pronounced had the plaintiff been assaulted by a number of
persons other than the defendant. It is not rare for people to become involved in
serial violent relationships. This is not a far-fetched scenario.
Much devolved in Martin v Crimes Compensation Tribunal, and devolves in
other cases, to the ability of the experts called for the applicant/plaintiff to
identify the significance in terms of the victim's mental health history of the
incident the subject of the litigation. The task can be an artificial one, but
decision-makers are obliged to have regard to the actual case before them,
namely the impact of the particular incident, only after that assessment
evaluating where the incident ranks, within the context of other potential
contributions to the victim's current mental health. On occasions, this can involve
evaluating whether a particular incident caused a condition such as post-
traumatic stress disorder and even whether a plaintiff can legitimately be
diagnosed as having more than one post-traumatic stress disorder at the one time,
arising from more than one traumatic incident occurring at different times in
their presence.
Proof of Psychiatric Injury
A practical response within the litigation context has been a propensity for
psychiatric injury claims during the past decade to assert a post-traumatic stress
disorder ("PTSD"), rather than a depression, an anxiety disorder or an adjustment
disorder, to have been caused by the tort of the tortfeasor. The forensic advantage
of a PTSD diagnosis is that it postulates as one of its prerequisites that the
psychiatric condition of the victim has been caused by the event (or tort) which is
the subject of the re-experiencing phenomena. Thus, in short, if the person has a
PTSD which is referable to a tortious event, it can readily be claimed that the
condition has been caused by the event. This presumptive nexus, inherent within
the indicia of PTSD, makes it the single most attractive psychiatric disorder
within DSM-IV-TR and ICD-10 from the perspective of plaintiffs.
However, something of a backlash may be seen to what has been described as
the litigation epidemic of PTSD during the 1990s. Controversies rage about the
extent to which diagnosis of PTSD has been excessive and of poor quality, with
suggestions from a number of eminent quarters that PTSD too often is
nomogenic.107 It has been argued in many cases and by a number of academic
writers and clinicians that the diagnosis is unreliable by reason of its heavy
reliance upon self-report of symptomatology by plaintiffs.
What can be discerned in PTSD cases in a number of countries is an escalating
insistence by the courts that the criteria for the disorder, as defined by DSM-IV-
TR and ICD-10, be rigorously proved.'108 Without such proof, nexus between the
tort and the subsequent symptomatology becomes problematic from a scientific
point of view, using the threefold typology, and also from a legal point of view.
This has resulted in an escalation in the incidence of informed and probing cross-
examination of plaintiffs and the expert witnesses commissioned on their behalf
with a focus upon whether the self-report of symptoms by plaintiffs is accurate
and has been accepted uncritically by forensic assessors, be they psychiatrists or
psychologists.
Given the importance of PTSD as a means of proving both psychiatric injury
and causation of adverse mental health symptomatology, it is inevitable that the
demands for scientific rigour in diagnosing the condition will continue to grow
both in the clinical and forensic domains. It is likely that greater scrutiny will be
given to clinical assessments unsupported by psychometric and other testing in
recognition that in such circumstances the nexus required within the criteria for
the disorder will not have been established adequately. The stakes for defendants
will provide the incentive for consistent and demanding scrutiny in the witness
box of the soundness of expert diagnoses of PTSD.
Discounting of Damages for Injury where Injury
Likely to Have Ensued Anyway
A particularly difficult issue of proof relates to the calculation of damages where
the injury attributed by the plaintiff in civil litigation may have ensued through
other causes, not the fault of the defendant, had the defendant not been tortiously
responsible for the injury being sustained.
For Australia, the key decision is that of the High Court in Malec v JC
Hutton109 where the defendant employed the plaintiff as a labourer in a meat
works between 1972 and 1980. In 1977 the plaintiff was diagnosed as suffering
from brucellosis, a disease acquired from animals. A possible sequela of
brucellosis is the development of a depressive illness; another is the development
of an organic condition which results in a degenerative condition in the spine.
The trial judge found that since at least 1982 the plaintiff had suffered from
symptoms in his cervical and lumbar spine but was not satisfied that the
condition was a consequence of the brucellosis. In other words, the connection
between the exposure and the injury was weak, existing at "experimental level"
but unable to satisfy the requirements of the "generalisation level".
He concluded that a neurotic illness which was diagnosed in 1979 was
precipitated by the brucellosis but found that it was at least as probable as not
that the neurotic condition from which the plaintiff suffered at the time of trial
was unrelated to the brucellosis. What is involved in this context is therefore a
conditional scenario where the existence of the neurosis could have been related
to the physical illness but could also have had another aetiology. From a scientific
perspective, unless the evidence clearly demands rejection of the null hypothesis
("the neurotic illness would have developed even in the absence of the exposure"),
the alternative hypothesis cannot be considered. In this case, the null hypothesis
could not be rejected.
This set of findings about causation led to an important analysis by the High
Court of Australia. The court identified the kinds of proof necessary for the
recovery of damages for injuries existing by the time of the trial. It held that since
the plaintiff proved that, at the date of the trial, as the result of the defendant's
negligence, he suffered from a psychiatric condition which rendered him
unemployable, subject to an allowance for the ordinary vicissitudes of life, the
plaintiff was prima facie entitled to be compensated for the near certainty that, as
the result of the defendant's negligence, he would suffer from his psychiatric
condition and be unemployable for the rest of his life. This meant that Mr Malec,
who was 49 at the time of trial, had to be compensated for his loss of earning
capacity.
The majority of the court held that the "all or nothing" approach to damages
for past and present events applied in the context of evaluation of eligibility for
future damages. This meant that if a court determines on the balance of
probabilities that an injury occurred and was attributable at least to the level of a
51 per cent probability, that is treated as certain, while if it concludes on the
balance of probabilities that something may not have occurred, namely not being
satisfied to the 50 per cent level, it is concluded as certain that it has not occurred.
In this instance the plaintiff could show on the balance of probabilities that he did
contract brucellosis as a result of the defendant's negligence. This then was
treated as a certainty. The plaintiff further established on the balance of
probabilities that he had contracted a psychiatric illness which was a medical
sequela of brucellosis, and that the psychiatric condition had rendered him
unemployable. Thus, the High Court was prepared to treat these two past events
and a future prediction of unemployability stemming from them as a certainty,
and to assess his damages accordingly.
By contrast, it found that the plaintiff was unable to show on the balance of
probabilities that his painful cervical and lumbar spine were attributable to
brucellosis. This meant under the "all or nothing" rule that he should not receive
any compensation for it.
These were past and present events. The employer argued that, on the balance
of probabilities it was likely that the plaintiff's back condition would have
rendered him unemployable at the age of 44 even if he had not contracted
brucellosis. It contended that there was a chance that as a result of the spinal
condition and consequent unemployability, the plaintiff would have developed a
psychiatric condition similar to that which was accepted by the court to have
occurred as a result of brucellosis. This meant, according to the employer, that
damages for the pain and suffering occasioned by the psychiatric condition which
he developed as a result of brucellosis should be awarded only for the period
1979-1982, and that no award should be made for care and attention provided by
his wife because the plaintiff had a similar psychiatric condition consequent upon
a condition for which the employer should not be held responsible and which
would have necessitated similar attention and care.
The High Court of Australia rejected the employer's arguments on the basis
that the employer was inviting the court to take account of hypothetical events
the proof of which is unattainable. It accepted that questions as to the future or
hypothetical effect of a physical injury or degeneration are not commonly
susceptible of scientific demonstration or proof. It found that it was proper to
have resort to the probabilities of such events occurring, accepting that the
probabilities may be very high or very low. Thus, courts must assess the degree of
probability that an event would have occurred, or might occur. On that basis they
should adjust their award of damages to reflect that degree of probability. These
hypothetical or future events can be established as possibilities. When so
established, it found that a court can take them into account when assessing
damages, but only in terms of adjusting (either by an increase or a decrease) the
amount of damages which would otherwise have been awarded.
For the plaintiff, this meant that he was entitled to be compensated for the
near certainty that he had contracted a psychiatric condition as a result of which
he would thenceforth be unemployable. The court accepted that there was a
chance that the plaintiff's back condition, for which the defendant was not
responsible, would have rendered him unemployable. It was appropriate for his
damages for his future loss of earning capacity to be reduced on this basis. There
was also a chance that although his back condition would have made him
unemployable, he would have gone through life without suffering a neurotic
condition of the kind with which he presented. It found that in determining the
chance that unemployability as the result of the back condition would have
precipitated a similar neurotic condition brought into play two factors:
the degree of probability that he would have become unemployable in
any event as the result of his back condition; and
the degree of probability that the unemployability as a result of the back
condition would have caused a neurotic condition.
The court found that it was appropriate to multiply these two possibilities. If,
for example, there was a 75 per cent probability of his becoming unemployable
by reason of his back condition even if he had not contracted brucellosis and a 75
per cent chance that that unemployability would have caused a similar neurotic
condition, there was only a 56.25 per cent chance (75 per cent x 75 per cent) that,
if he had not contracted brucellosis, he would have developed a similar
condition.110
In short, therefore, it found that the plaintiff was entitled to be compensated
for pain and suffering on the basis that his neurotic condition was the direct
result of the defendant's negligence. However, it accepted that the damages
should be reduced to take account of the chance that factors unconnected with
the defendant's negligence might have brought about the onset of a similar
condition. This analysis also entailed that the plaintiff was entitled to be
compensated for the care and attention provided by his wife, an amount to be
reduced to take account of the chance that factors unconnected with the
defendant's negligence would have necessitated similar care and attention.
Thus, in the wake of Malec v JC Hutton two different tests exist for
determination of causation. The test in relation to the nexus between matters in
the past, such as a negligent act or omission, and the current condition of a
plaintiff must be proved on the balance of probabilities, whereupon it
transmogrifies into a certainty in the "all or nothing" approach for calculating
damages. This is in spite of the fact that it is common for there to be multiple
logistical difficulties lying in the way of the plaintiff proving the nexus or the
degree of nexus between his or her current health condition and a previous
negligent act or omission. By contrast, even remote percentile chances are taken
into account when the focus is turned toward the future. This means differing
problems for the marshalling and presentation of expert evidence and a
potentially highly confusing situation for decision-makers, especially jurors, who
at the one time are instructed to entertain sophisticated estimates of chance by
statisticians and epidemiologists and at another are told that if proof falls even
marginally short of 50 per cent causation is not established and recovery is not
permitted.
Res Ipsa Loquitur
In some limited circumstances the law has accepted that strict proof is not
required that an accident was caused by a breach of a duty of care and that the
defendant was the person responsible. In Australia a plaintiff can rely on the
notion that the circumstances speak for themselves, that res ipsa loquitur,
provided that the trier of fact is persuaded that:
there is an "absence of explanation" of the occurrence that caused the
injury;
the occurrence was of such a kind that it does not ordinarily occur
without negligence; and
the instrument or agency that caused the injury was under the control of
the defendant.111
Prima facie the conduct of the defendant must have been of a kind that does
not ordinarily happen without negligence and it must be clear that it was the
defendant who was responsible.112 The principal function of the doctrine of res
ipsa loquitur is to absolve the plaintiff of the need to prove matters which are
clear without proof and where the facts may not be within the plaintiff's
knowledge or easy means of proof. It functions as a presumption of negligence,113
described by Field114 as "almost impossible to define, since it is merely the
operation of a natural principle which ensures that when one party produces a
cogent case which prima facie points the finger of blame at the other, then that
other party would be well advised to adduce evidence which dispels the
presumption of culpability thereby created."115
In the early case of Byrne v Boadle116 Pollock CB spoke of the doctrine in terms
of a "presumption".117 It appears that the predominant view in Australia118 and
New Zealand,119 as well as formerly in Canada,120 although not in England,121 is
that the doctrine raises no more than a permissive presumption, entitling an
inference about a fact in issue from circumstantial evidence. This means that the
burden of proving the case remains with the plaintiff122 – if an accident is wholly
unexplained and there are two hypotheses about its cause, one consistent with
the negligence of the defendant, the other inconsistent with it, the doctrine will
not apply, meaning that the plaintiff will not have discharged the burden of
proof.123 The contrast with the situation applying to the inferences that should be
drawn after a breach of duty is proved and an injury follows under the approach
of Kirby and Gaudron JJ is apparent and not easily reconciled.
While many difficult issues continue to envelop the circumstances in which
technically a res ipsa loquitur allegation of tortious impropriety can be made
out,124 expert evidence adduced on the part of the defendant can go a significant
way to proving that the maxim should not apply. Such evidence can raise the
serious possibility that causation other than tortious conduct by the defendant
could have been responsible for the accident which caused injury to the plaintiff.
Such evidence will often be counterintuitive in the sense of raising for
consideration possibilities of causation of an accident which would not otherwise
readily occur in the mind of the trier of fact. When such matters become
apparent, proof depends on "observational level" information – an apparent nexus
is illusory because other factors may have been responsible for the outcome.
Proving Causation of Injuries and Offending at the
Sentencing Hearing
A difficult and important question at the sentencing stage of criminal
proceedings relates to proof of causation, and impact, of offending, an issue that
has the potential both to improve and to worsen the situation of the accused
person. It arises frequently in the context of the offender attempting to point to
indirect factors as explaining, albeit not justifying, his or her offending and the
prosecution seeking to ensure that the sentencer has an appreciation not just of
the bare facts of the offending but the full context of the criminal behaviour,
including its impact upon the victim. This will involve the sentencing judge or
magistrate taking into account the physical and psychological effects of the crime
upon the victim and also factoring into consideration a range of mitigatory facts
asserted to detract from the offender's culpability.
Generally, it is the prosecution that seeks to adduce victim impact information
in order to apprise the sentencer of the context in which the sentencing exercise
is taking place. Often the victim impact statement will highlight sequelae of the
crime which demonstrate in an eloquent way how adversely the offence has
impacted upon the primary victim and even upon secondary victims, such as the
surviving relatives of a homicide victim. Such information has the potential to
worsen the disposition imposed by the sentencer.
Because of its ramifications for the disposition, there is an incentive for the
accused to dispute the assertions of the victim. Generally the victim impact
statement will simply be the expression of sentiment and (subjective) experience
by the victim. This is not to downplay its legitimacy, simply to reflect that it is
the articulation of the experience of pain and distress by the victim, often its tone
depending upon the stage of resolution or accommodation which the victim has
reached psychologically to the consequences of what has been done to them by
the offender. On occasions, too, the victim impact information is bolstered by
evaluation of the victim's condition by expert assessment – frequently by the
victim's treaters, sometimes by forensic assessors.
A further consideration also intrudes from time to time upon the information
placed before the court at the time of sentencing. In a number of Australian
jurisdictions, in particular in New South Wales, Victoria and South Australia,
substantial awards of compensation have been made by courts against
offenders.125 It is in the interests of the victim of the crime to have such
information placed before courts in order to maximise the award of
compensation. Tactically the best time for this information to go before a court is
at the time of sentencing – at this stage the defendant is likely to be at his or her
most conciliatory, seeking to minimise their sentence.
It can be advantageous for the offender to be seen not to oppose an application
for compensation by a victim. It tends to suggest insight into the consequences of
the offending and a preparedness to take responsibility for the ramifications of
the crime – in short, it suggests a diminished likelihood of recidivism, thereby
raising the possibility of a sentence that is not too oriented toward retribution,
punishment and individual deterrence. In South Australia, the sentencing
legislation even obliges the sentencer to take into account the compensation order
for the sentencing disposition to be imposed on the offender.126 It is likely that
unofficially this occurs in other jurisdictions also.127
Although it is advantageous for the victim to make an application for
compensation against an offender, where the offender has means, and although
there can be forensic opportunities for the offender in being seen to acquiesce in
such an order, this does not mean that the information thereby placed before a
court will always be accurate. In fact, there are considerable reasons why the
provision of such information may be exaggerated or embellished – either
deliberately or inadvertently. In such circumstances, there can be good reason for
the offender to contest the assertions of psychological and somatic harm and to
dispute the aetiology of the victim's current condition, contending that the victim
suffered a preexisting condition or that other factors have influenced the
seriousness of their current symptomatology.
It is standard sentencing law that, broadly speaking, an offender takes his or
her victim as they are.128 In Australia, it appears reasonably clear that if the
victim of criminal violence has suffered particularly adverse consequences, that
can constitute an aggravating feature for the purposes of sentencing.129 However,
where the commission of an offence produces an outcome which is totally
unforeseen and was unforeseeable by a reasonable person, then the outcome is
not regarded as relevant for sentencing purposes, save as evidencing the infliction
of some degree of harm to the victim.130 By contrast, if the victim has been
particularly resilient or stoic and has suffered less than might have been expected
by way of negative sequelae, this does not constitute a mitigating factor.131
However, if an offender was in a position to appreciate the particular
vulnerability of the victim, such as that they would be vocationally, educationally
or psychologically harmed by the crime, this constitutes an aggravating matter
for the purposes of sentencing.
The other side of the coin is that offenders frequently wish to inform the
sentencer of personal circumstances, such as abuse previously visited upon them,
impaired educational opportunities, dependence upon alcohol or drugs, and a
range of life's vicissitudes which might be regarded as detracting from their
moral turpitude in having offended. Such information is routinely provided from
the bar table but, where it is important, and really has the likelihood of bearing
upon the sentence to be imposed, it is unsatisfactory for courts to be dependent
upon assertions made from the bar table. Such assertions need to be the subject of
evidence and proof in the usual way.
The question that rose for the Australian High Court in Olbrich v The Queen132
was as to whether different standards of proof apply to information proffered by
the prosecution to the detriment of the offender, on the one hand, and evidence
proffered by the offender to his or her advantage, on the other. It held that there
are different standards, the court applying an earlier Victorian Court of Appeal
decision on the subject.133 It determined that where information placed before the
sentencing court is deleterious for the offender, it must be proved beyond
reasonable doubt. However, where the information is advantageous for the
offender, it need only be proved on the balance of probabilities. This has
important tactical and practical consequences. It means that while it is
strategically incumbent or advantageous for the victim to set before the court
their circumstances at the time of sentencing, such matters, need only be proved
to the civil standard. However, where information placed before the court is
adverse for the accused, it needs to be proved by the prosecution to the criminal
standard. An example of such material is evidence that tends to establish a
particularly adverse impact of the crime upon the victim, perhaps even in
circumstances that were reasonably within the foresight of the offender. Thus,
putting such material before the sentencing court, and proving it beyond
reasonable doubt is advantageous for the prosecution. Viewed another way, the
offender is best positioned to contest such material at the time of sentencing; if a
compensation application is made at the time of the sentencing hearing or shortly
afterwards the victim will need to prove the impact only on the balance of
probabilities.
The ailing of the High Court stops short of the practice in England where upon
a plea of guilty and there being a conflict on the facts, a sentencing judge is
regarded as having three options: (1) to empanel a jury to determine the issue; (2)
to decide the issue him or herself on the basis of evidence; (3) to hear submissions
on the issue but if there are substantial conflicts on the issue, so far as possible to
accept the position advanced on behalf of the accused.134
The tenor of both the Australian and the English approaches is to facilitate the
offender placing before the court information which has the potential to put into
context how it was that they came on this occasion to break the criminal law,
thereby causing harm or injury to the victim. What would otherwise be a heavy
burden in the criminal process for the offender to prove such matters is eased
where there are conflicts between the prosecution and the offender, and in
Australia where the offender seeks to establish facts that are put as mitigatory. By
contrast, where information is sought to be advanced that would aggravate the
situation of the offender, the prosecution is put to a high level of proof, thereby in
principle enabling the offender to contest such matters effectively. However, the
realities of the criminal trial leave the prosecution in a strong position where it is
contended that the offending has caused serious sequelae for the victim. First,
there is a major disincentive for the offender to be seen to dispute such matters,
for fear of being perceived as lacking in empathy and insight for the victim's
plight, such a perception on the part of the sentencer making a heavier sentence
for the offender more likely. Secondly, the entitlement of the offender to have the
victim medically examined to ascertain the reliability and objectivity of the
victim impact information placed before the sentencing court by the prosecution
is dubious. This means that although the evidentiary rules about burden and
standard of proof are relatively benign so far as the offender is concerned, the
realities for the offender in relation to disputing the extent and causation of the
victim's post-crime injuries are otherwise.
Conclusion
It is apparent that many items of evidence suspected of belonging to a causal
relationship in fact reach no higher level than "observations" or "generalisations".
It is important for the accuracy of the fact-finding process that these levels not be
confused with the "explanation level" where science and medicine would say
with confidence that one fact has been a cause or the cause of another. This
requires a sophisticated understanding by triers of fact about distinctions and
subtleties in areas of endeavour outside the law. Such an understanding can be
acquired by effective and sophisticated communication within the body of
forensic reports and via oral evidence in the courtroom. However, all too often
expert evidence, especially of a numerate form, has fallen short of such standards
and has had the potential to lead to misunderstanding and misestimation by lay
persons such as judges, magistrates and jurors. Not only this; it has fuelled the
mistrust and anxiety about expert evidence harboured by both appellate and trial
judges.
Proof of causation lies at the very heart of the resolution of most civil and
criminal litigation. The identity of the party carrying the burden of proof and the
standard of proof needing to be discharged by a litigant establish the ground rules
for how the litigation contest is fought and resolved. One of the difficulties that
has pervaded the various legal tests applicable to the means by which causation
can be proved and disproved is the uncertain formulations enunciated by the law
about what actually constitutes causation, as well as the resort in desperation to
idealised notions of intuition and common knowledge. Where recourse is had by
the courts to such vague formulations as common sense, in rejecting options such
as the "but for test", it leaves the role of proof – especially by expert evidence –
problematic and uncertain. This is especially so where such evidence is far from
determinative but simply forms part of a body of information which is indicative
of connectnedness between what is said to be a wrongful act and an adverse
outcome.
In Australia, by contrast with most parts of the United States, it is now the law
that possibility expert evidence in the civil context, such as epidemiology
evidence of a low order, is admissible. However, how decision-makers will
actually integrate such evidence into the task of determining whether a teratogen
or carcinogen claim is established is much less clear.135
In the context of evaluating the extent in the civil trial to which the tortfeasor's
tortious behaviour has resulted in the current physical and psychological
condition of the plaintiff, rather than merely contributing to a condition affected
by pre-existing or subsequently caused injuries, or that was latent or prodromal
at the time of the commission of the tort, again expert evidence plays a major
role. However, the extent to which psychiatrists and psychologists ex post facto
can accurately arrive at such opinions is open to significant doubt, the task being
inherently a forensic, and an arbitrary one, not a role customarily encountered in
the clinical context where the focus is upon remediation rather than attribution
of contribution to different incidents and events.
When it falls to the defendant to contest the nexus between a tortious act and a
subsequent injury, the burden again falls heavily upon expert evidence. In
Australia, once a tortious act is established, a presumption appears to exist that
an injury manifesting in its aftermath is attributable to the tort. Whether the
presumption is substantive or evidentiary is unclear but what can be said is that
if the defendant must disprove causation, this is not an easy task in personal
injuries litigation or in the context of a medical negligence trial. It is clear that
limited weight will henceforth be given to plaintiffs' assertions in "failure to warn
cases" that had they been properly warned they would not have submitted to the
procedure or would have made different arrangements for the procedure to be
undertaken. More weight will be placed upon what options from a medical point
of view actually were open to them.
The provision of such informed opinions by specialist witnesses requires
dispassionate, evidence-based expert opinion. Generally the theories underlying
such evidence will need to be falsifiable, to have been ventilated for peer
assessment in appropriate professional literature, to be subject to controlled tests
and to be accepted by a reasonable percentage of professionals practising in the
area.136 This is so in the United States federal jurisdictions as a threshold
admissibility criterion and as a factor assisting evaluation of the probative value
of such evidence in other countries. Evidence complying with such demands is
consistent with the movement toward evidence-based clinical practice in
medicine137 and with rigorous scientific standards generally in respect of
causation.
In determining the adequacy of causation evidence about the relationship
between the current or future condition or capacity of a plaintiff and an earlier
breach of duty by a defendant, the law has created a distinction between the
kinds of proof required. As to the future, probabilities falling even well short of
likelihood are contemplated. At a practical level, the complexities in such an
exercise are significant indeed. For the past, expert evidence must simply be
addressed to whether it is more likely than not that the breach of duty caused the
current condition. To this extent, at least, the task for the decision-maker, while
conceptually difficult to justify, is somewhat more straightforward. The difficulty
is that, while it is comforting to think of the past as knowable and definite,
frequently in practice exigencies of available evidence render the situation
otherwise. The best that a combination of pertinent expert and lay evidence can
do is to satisfy a decision-maker to a degree that a correlation that is causative
exists. Thus the need for a consistency between the criteria for determining
correlations between past and the future, on the one hand, and past/present and
the future, on the other. However, it must be conceded that were such an
approach to be adopted the pressure would be placed even more squarely upon
decision-makers to be enabled to assimilate and effectively deal with the kinds of
complex statistical evidence that is presented to them in Malec v JS Hutton
scenarios.
Similarly, there can be a gap between the technical rules of proof and the
reality. An example exists in the sentencing phase of criminal trials. The
considerable strategic disincentive and logistical impediments to the offender
effectively contesting an assertion by the prosecution about the aetiology and
extent of the victim's allegedly criminally caused injuries render it highly
problematic for the offender to dispute the contentions of the prosecution. This is
the more serious because the expert evidence from the prosecution/victim will
tend to be from treaters of the victim and may well be advanced in the
anticipation of second-phase litigation relating to entitlement to criminal injuries
compensation. If such evidence is to be reliable, much will depend upon
individual experts' commitment to objectivity and fair-mindedness of assessment.
Proof of causation therefore is dominated by considerations of likelihood and
chance, as well as being dependent upon experts' capacity to make such notions
accessible. As already described, legal tests for causation and its proof remain in a
considerable degree of flux and by reason of their ambiguity are difficult of
practical exegesis and application. The day-to-day pressure is placed upon expert
witnesses and report-writers to address these complex issues and mathematically
expressed potentials to produce a forensic outcome. In principle, the hallmarks of
expert evidence that will constructively inform decision-makers are scientific
rigour, the extent to which it is based upon data and evidence of fact, and the
degree to which its reasoning processes are both transparent and falsifiable.
However, for as long as the law seeks refuge in unscientific notions such as
common sense and intuitive assessment of causation, and for as long as it
arbitrarily imposes different tests for matters that are conceptually
indistinguishable, proof of causation by expert and lay evidence alike will remain
the unsatisfactory handmaiden of such phenomena as the aura of persuasiveness
of an individual witness on a given court day. This is a recipe for inconsistency
and error in decision-making.
* Barrister in full-time private practice in Melbourne, Australia, Professor in the Department of
Psychological Medicine, Adjunct Professor in the Law Faculty and an Honorary Associate Professor
in the Department of Forensic Medicine at Monash University, Adjunct Professor in the Department
of Law and Legal Studies, La Trobe University. The author acknowledges the generous and patient
assistance given to him with earlier drafts by Eric Magnusson in relation to his appreciation of
scientific matters, and Belinda Bennett, John Devereux, Hugh Selby and Danuta Mendelson in
relation to his appreciation of legal matters.
1 See eg March v E & MH Stramare Pty Ltd (1991) 171 CLR 506 at 509; Chappel v Hart [1998] HCA 55 at
[24]; Fitzgerald v Penn (1954) 91 CLR 268 at 277-8; Environment Agency v Empress Car Co
(Abertillery) Ltd [1999] 2 AC 22 at 29.
2 See E Magnusson, "Statistical Proof of Causation", Chapter 19.
3 See in particular R v Karger [2001] SASC 64; I Freckelton. P Reddy & H Selby, Australian Judicial
Perspectives on Expert Evidence, AIJA. Melbourne, 1999; I Freckelton, P Reddy & H Selby, Australian
Magistrates' Perspectives on Expert Evidence: A Comparative Study, AIJA, Melbourne, 2001.
4 Cuming Smith & Co Ltd v Western Farmers' Co-operative Ltd [1979] VR 129 at 147; Anderson v Blashki
[1993] 2 VR 89 at 95-6; Basser v Medical Board of Victoria [1981] VR 953 at 969.
5 See Briginshaw v Briginshaw (1938) 60 CLR 336.
6 See eg Keown v Khan (1998) 101 A Crim R 503.
7 WC Thompson, "Are Juries Competent to Evaluate Statistical Evidence?" (1989) 52 Law Contemp
Problems 9; DH Kaye & JJ Koehler, "Can Jurors Understand Probabilistic Evidence?" (1991) 154 J R
Statist Soc A 75.
8 For a useful analysis of the presumptions in the law, see E Ullmann-Margalit, "On Presumption" (1983)
L XXX Journal of Philosophy 143.
9 CG Hempel, The Philosophy of Natural Science, Prentice-Hail, New Jersey, 1966.
10 K Popper, The Logic of Scientific Discovery, Hutchinson, London, 1959; see also T Kuhn. The Structure
of Scientific Revolutions, 2nd edn, University of Chicago Press, Chicago, 1970. Latterly, see AF
Chalmers, What is This Thing Called Science?, 3rd edn, University of Queensland Press, 1999.
11 An earlier terns for such evidence was "presumptive evidence": see JH Wigmore, The Science of Judicial
Proof Little, Brown & Co, Boston, 1937 at para 6: J Stone & WAN Wells, Evidence: Its History and
Policies, Butterworths, Sydney, 1991, at p132.
12 WAN Wells, Evidence and Advocacy, Butterworths, Sydney, 1988, at p218.
13 J Bentham, Rationale of Judicial Evidence in The Works of Jeremy Bentham, Russell and Russell, New
York, 1962, Vol VII, pp308-9.
14 AM Burrill, A Treatise on the Nature, Principles and Rules of Circumstantial Evidence, JS Voorhies,
New York, 1856, p207, as to which see Wigmore, op cit, nil, at p795. See also W Wills, An Essay on the
Principles of Circumstantial Evidence, Butterworths, London, 1902.
15 See, for instance, Stone & Wells, op cit, n11.
16 See R v Thomas [1972] NZLR 34 at 41 per Thomas J.
17 Belhaven and Stenton Perlerage (1875) 1 App Cas 278 at 279.
18 Chamberlain v The Queen No 2 (1984) 153 CLR 521 at 536 per Gibbs CJ and Mason J.
19 Chamberlain v The Queen No 2 (1984) 153 CLR 521 at 598 per Brennan J; at 536 per Gibbs CJ and Mason
J; see also Moss v Baines [1974] WAR 7 at 11.
20 (1984) 153 CLR 521.
21 Ibid, at 537-8.
22 (1984) 153 CLR 521; 51 ALR 225.
23 CLR at 536; ALR at 237.
24 CLR at 627; ALR at 313. In Chamberlain v The Queen the High Court found that although the scientific
evidence that blood under the dashboard and in the car of the accused parents was foetal blood and
the evidence of a pathologist that he saw on the jumpsuit of the deceased the imprint of a hand in
blood were unsafe to form the basis of an inference of guilt, the jury's finding of guilt should not be
disturbed because of the existence of other legitimate bases for their decision. In R v Anderson [2000]
1 VR 1 at 26 the Victorian Court of Appeal applied the same principle to insist that a jury should have
been instructed that they could only accept the opinions expressed by two treating doctors that
wounds on the accused had been self-inflicted, to the exclusion of opinions on the same subject
expressed by a forensic physician and a forensic pathologist, if satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that
the former opinions were correct: see also R v Sodo (1975) 61 Cr App R 131 at 134; R v Van Beelen
(1973) 4 SASR 353.
25 68 Cal 2d 319, 438 P 2d 33 (1968).
26 LH Tribe, "Trial by Mathematics: Precision and Ritual in the Legal Process" (1971) 84 Harvard Law
Review 1329; see also T Starkie, A Practical Treatise on the Law of Evidence, 7th American edition, T
& JW Johnson, Philadelphia, 1842, Vol 1, p568: "The Notions of those who have supposed that mere
moral probabilities or relations could ever be represented by numbers or space, and thus subjected to
arithmetical analysis, cannot but be regarded as visionary and chimerical."
27 LJ Cohen, The Probable and the Provable, Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1977.
28 Adams v The Queen [1996] 2 Cr App R 467 at 481.
29 See eg P David, "Probability and Proof: Some Basic Concepts" in T Anderson & W T wining, Analysis
of Evidence, Weidenfeld & Nicholson, London, 1991.
30 See eg B Grofman, "Mathematical Models of Juror and Jury Decision-Making" in BD Sales, The Trial
Process, Plenum Press, New York, 1981.
31 See E Magnusson, "Statistical Proof of Causation", Chapter 19.
32 See I Freckelton & H Selby, Expert Evidence: Law, Practice and Procedure, 2nd edn, Law Book Co,
Sydney, 2002.
33 See eg Mutemeri v Cheesman (1999) 100 A Crim R 397; see also D Groves, "Commentary" (1998) 22
Criminal Law Journal 357 at 359; D Lanham, "Danger Down Under" [1999] Criminal Law Review 960.
34 In re Agent Orange Product Liability Litigation, 597 F Supp 740 at 834 (EDNY, 1984).
35 AB Hill, "The Environment and Disease: Association or Causation?" (1965) 58 Proceedings of the Royal
Society of Medicine 295 at 299.
36 A point made in another context by P Sherman, "Agent Orange and the Problem of the Indeterminate
Plaintiff" (1986) 52 Brooklyn Law Review 369 at 384.
37 Note that parallel to the explanation ultimately found for AIDS causation, there was also an
explanation for the valid but misleading generalisation about nitrate inhalants. See M Dore, "A
Commentary on the Use of Epidemiology Evidence in Demonstrating Cause-in-Fact" (1983) 7
Harvard Environmental Law Review 429; TA Brennan, "Untangling Causation Issues in Law and
Medicine: Hazardous Substance Litigation" (1987) 107 Annals of Internal Medicine 741; HM Ginzburg,
"Use and Misuse of Epidemiological Data in the Courtroom: Defining the Limits of Inferential and
Particularistic Evidence in Mass Tort Litigation" (1986) 12 American Journal of Law and Medicine
423.
39 Hill, op cit, n35, at 95; see also MM Thompson, "Causal Inference in Epidemiology: Implications for
Toxic Tort Litigation" (1992) 71 North Carolina Law Review 247.
40 (1998) 45 BMLR 162.
41 [1990] 1 Med LR 117.
42 [2000] NSWCA 347; see also I Freckelton, "Epidemiology Evidence" (2000) 8 Journal of Law and
Medicine 133.
43 See in this regard R Goldberg, "The Contraceptive Pill, Negligence and Causation: Views on Vadera v
Shaw" 12000) 8 Medical Law Review 316.
44 Vadera v Shaw (1998) 45 BMLR 162, Lexis-Nexis, p13.
45 See eg St George Club Ltd v Hines (1962) 35 ALJR 106 at 107; Bonnington Castings Ltd v Wardlaw
[1956] AC 613.
46 (1976) 50 ALJR 720 at 724.
47 Nicolia v Commissioner for Railways (NSW) (1970) 45 ALJR 465.
48 EMI (Australia) Ltd v Bes [1970] 2 NSWR 238.
49 Fernandez v Tubemakers of Australia Ltd (1975) 2 NSWLR 190 at 197 per Glass JA.
50 For a useful analysis of this issue, see D Kaye, "The Limits of the Preponderance of the Evidence
Standard: Justifiably Naked Statistical Evidence and Multiple Causation" (1982) 2 American Bar
Foundation Research Journal 487, also found in W Twining & A Stein (eds), Evidence and Proof,
Dartmouth, Aldershot, 1992; see also GO Robinson, "Multiple Causation in Tort Law: Reflections on
the DES Cases" (1982) 68 Vanderbilt Law Review 713. See also AG Celli Jr, "Toward a Risk
Contribution Approach to Tortfeasor Identification and Multiple Causation Cases" (1990) 65 New
York University Law Review 635.
51 Relative ratios between 1.1 and 3 are generally described as "weak" (ARP between 9 per cent and 67 per
cent), relative ratios between 3 and 8 are "moderate" (ARP between 67 per cent and 87 per cent);
between 8 and 16 as "strong" (ARP between 87 per cent and 94 per cent), and between 16 and 40+ as
"extremely strong" (ARP between 94 per cent and 97.5 per cent).
52 Seltsam, at [79].
53 Ibid, at [79].
54 Applying Layton v Vines (1952) 85 CLR 352 at 358.
55 See R v Thomas [1972] NZLR 34 at 41 per Thomas J.
56 Seltsam, at [98].
57 At [137]. See Thompson, op cit, n39, at 251 for a useful analysis of risk ratio, pointing out that it can be
calculated as the risk of disease in the exposed group divided by the risk of disease in an unexposed
group; or the number of exposed persons developing a disease over time divided by the total number
of exposed people, that result being divided by the number of unexposed persons developing disease
over time divided by the total number of unexposed people. The attributable risk proportion ("ARP")
is the proportion of exposed persons who have contracted the disease for whom the disease in
attributable to the exposure. It is calculated as follows: ARP = risk ratio -1 divided by risk ratio.
58 Seltsam, at [139].
59 Citing National Insurance Co of New Zealand Ltd v Espagne (1961) 105 CLR 569 at 591; March v E &
MH Stramare Ptv Ltd (1991) 171 CLR 506 at 509, 522. 530-1; Chappel v Hart (1998) 195 CLR 232 esp at
[6]-[7], [23], [62]-[64], [93], [111], [122].
60 Seltsam, at [142]-[143].
61 Federal Judicial Center, Manual on Scientific Evidence, US Government Printing Office, Washington
DC, 1994, at p168.
62 De Luca v Merrell Dow Pharmaceutics Inc, 911 F 941 at 958-9.
63 In Re Joint E & S Dists Asbestos Litig, 758 F Supp 199 at 203 (SDNY 1991).
64 Manko v United States, 636 F Supp 1419 at 1434 (WD Mo 1986).
65 Marder v GD Searle & Co, 630 F Supp 1087 at 1092 (D Md 1986).
66 In re >Agent Orange= Prod Liab Litig, 597 F Supp 740 at 835-7 (EDNY, 1984).
67 Hamer calls such matters "counterfactual": D Hamer, "Proof of Causation and Quantum in an
Unpredictable World" (1999) 23 Melbourne University Law Review 557.
68 See the comments of Sopinka J in Snell v Farrell [1990] 2 SCR 311 at 320-1.
69 Russell, "Establishing Medical Negligence – A Herculean Task?" (1998) 3 Scots Law Times 17 at 20-2.
70 R Milstein, "Causation in Medical Negligence – Recent Developments" (1997) 6 Australian Health Law
Bulletin 21.
71 Chappel v Hart (1998) 156 ALR 517 at 546.
72 This is often the case with matters relating to burden and standard of proof: see A Kiralfy (ed), The
Burden of Proof, Professional Books Ltd, London, 1987.
73 [1972] 3 All ER 1008; for a critical analysis see JG Fleming, "Probabilistic Causation in Tort Law: A
Postscript" (1991) 70 Canadian Bar Review 136.
74 [1988] AC 1074.
75 McGhee v National Coal Board [1972] 3 All ER 1008 at 1013. By contrast, for instance, the position of
Lord Salmon (at 1018) was that when it is proved on the balance of probabilities that an employer has
been negligent and that the negligence has materially increased the risk of an employee contracting
an industrial disease, the employer is liable in damages if the employee contracts the disease
notwithstanding that the employer is not responsible for other factors which materially contributed
to the contraction of the disease.
76 A recent development is the decision of the Court of Appeal in Holtby v Brigham & Cowan (Hull Ltd)
[2000] 3 All ER 421 at 428-9, where the Court of Appeal applied the reasoning in McGhee to a case
involving serial causation; the plaintiff had been exposed to asbestos by two or more persons. The
court affirmed the requirement of McGhee that the plaintiff must show that the defendant's conduct
materially contributed to the plaintiff's injury. However, it found the defendant liable only to the
extent of that injury.
77 See Sindell v Abbott Laboratories, 607 P 2d 924 (1980); Hymonowtitz v Eli Lilly, 541 NYS 2d 941 (CA
1989); see also R Goldberg, Causation and Risk in the Law of Torts, Hart Publishing, Oxford, 1999, at
pi 1.
78 For the contrary approach, see Zafft v Eli Lillv & Co, 676 SW 2d 241 (Mo 1984); Mulcahy v Eli Lilly &
Co, 386 NW 2d 67 (Iowa 1986).
79 (1998) 195 CLR 232.
80 Sutherland Shire Council v Heyman (1985) 157 CLR 424 at 487 per Brennan J; Bennett v Minister of
Community Welfare (1992) 176 CLR 408 at 422 per Gaudron J.
81 Compare H v The Royal Alexandra Hospital for Children [1990] Med LR 297.
82 Ibid, citing as authority Sutherland Shire Council v Heyman (1985) 157 CLR 424 at 487 per Brennan J:
Bennett v Minister of Community Welfare (1992) 176 CLR 408 at 422 per Gaudron J.
83 Chappel v Hart, at [68].
84 Ibid, at 527.
85 [2001] HCA at [89].
86 Chappel v Hart, at [68] citing Bennett v Minister of Community Welfare (1992) 176 CLR 408 at 420-1.
87 Chappel v Hart, at [32]-[34]; Rosenberg, at [88].
88 For defendant concern about the impact of the shift in burden, see J Lavery, "Chappel v Hart: The High
Court's Lost Chance" (1998) 7(3) Australian Health Law Bulletin 25 at 29.
89 In the context of Canadian law, the decision of Linden J in Davidson v Connaught Laboratories (1980)
14 CCLT 251 is an example. It was held that the warnings from a pharmaceutical company in relation
to a rabies vaccine were unsatisfactory but that the role of the doctors in the case showed that even if
there had been a proper warning it would have made no difference to the ultimate outcome as the
doctors did not discuss neurological side-effects with their patients for fear that they would decline
necessary treatment; in other words a proper warning would have been mediated by medical practice
and would not have resulted in the patient failing to be exposed to the vaccine.
90 Arndt v Smith [1997] 2 SCR 539; Reibl v Hughes [1980] 2 SCR 880 at 898-9; Canterbury v Spence, 464 F
2d 772 at 791 (1972).
91 Chatterton v Gerson [1981] QB 432 at 445.
92 (1994) 5 Med LR 285 at 289.
93 Rogers v Whitaker (1992) 175 CLR 479 at 490; Chappel v Hart (1998) 195 CLR 232 at 246 [32], 272 [93];
Rosenberg v Percival [2001] HCA 18.
94 Rosenberg v Percival [2001] HCA 18; see further I Freckelton, "Revisiting the Duty to Warn; the High
Court's decision in Rosenberg v Percival" (2001) 9 Journal of Law and Medicine 5.
95 Watt or Thomas v Thomas [1947] AC 484 at 488; see also Paterson v Paterson (1953) 89 CLR 212 at 224.
96 Rosenberg v Percival [2001] HCA 18 at [25].
97 Ibid, at [44].
98 Ibid, at [45].
99 Citing Gover v Slate of South Australia and Perriam (1985) 39 SASR 543 at 566 per Cox J; see also Ellis v
Wallsend District Hospital (1989) 17 NSWLR 553 at 559-60, 581.
100 Rosenberg v Percival [2001] HCA 18 at [155].
101 See the aspiration of the courts in the "child sexual abuse accommodation syndrome" cases for a clear
correlation between childhood sexual abuse and later behavioural "symptoms": R v B [1987] 1 NZLR
362 at 368; R v Accused [1989] 1 NZLR 714; Ingles v The Queen, unreported, Tasmanian Court of
Criminal Appeal, 4 May 1993; R v C (1993) 60 SASR 467; J v The Queen (1994) 75 A Crim R 522; F v
The Queen (1995) 83 A Crim R 502.
102 See Tame v Morgan [2000] NSWCA 121; Beavis v Apthorpe (1962) 80 WN (NSW) 852 at 857; Bourhill v
Young [1943] AC 92.
103 (1975) 7 ALR 571 at 575.
104 (1990) 169 CLR 638 at 642-3.
105 See eg Thompson v Evanoss [2000] ACTSC 73.
106 (1995) 8 VAR 39; (1997) 91 A Crim R 301.
107 See eg AA Stone, "Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder and the Law: Critical Review of the New Frontier"
(1993) 21(1) Bulletin of the American Academy of Psychiatry and Law 23; AC McFarlane, "Post-
Traumatic Stress Disorder" in I Freckelton & H Selby (eds), Expert Evidence, 5 vol looseleaf service &
CD Rom, Law Book Co, Sydney, 1993-...; LA Neal, "The Pitfalls of Making a Categorical Diagnosis of
Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder in Personal Injury Litigation" (1994) 34 Medicine, Science and the Law
117; J Ellard, "The Epidemic of Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder: A Passing Phase" (1997) 166 Medical
Journal of Australia 84.
108 For a fuller analysis of this issue see I Freckelton. "Trauma Evidence" in I Freckelton & H Selby (eds),
Expert Evidence, 5 vol looseleaf service & CD Rom, Law Book Co, Sydney, 1993-...; I Freckelton,
Criminal Injuries Compensation: Law, Practice and Policy, Law Book Co, Sydney, 2001, Chapter 13.
109 (1990) 169 CLR 638 at 642-3.
110 Ibid.
111 Schellenberg v Tunnel Holdings Pty Ltd [2000] HCA 18 at [25]. In Mummery v Irvings Pty Ltd (1956) 96
CLR 99 at 116 Dixon CJ, Webb, Fullagar and Taylor JJ emphasised that the requirement that the
accident "must be such as in the ordinary course of things does not happen if those who have the
management use proper care is of vital importance and fully explains why in such circumstances res
ipsa loquitur."
112 Thus for instance in the leading Scottish authority on the subject, Devine v Colvilles Ltd (1969) SLT 154
a workman who had leapt from a platform as a result of a nearby violent explosion, it was found that
it was self-evident that an explosion of such violence that causes fear of imminent danger to workers
does not occur in the ordinary course of things in a steel works if those who have responsibility for
management use proper care.
113 Although technically to describe it as a presumption is not helpful, a better approach being to describe
it as an inference of negligence or even as a subset of circumstantial evidence: see JW Strong,
McCormick on Evidence, West Publishing Co, St Paul, 1992; WL Prosser, Handbook of the Law of
Torts, 4th edn, West Publishing Co, St Paul, 1971.
114 D Field, The Law of Evidence of Scotland, W Green & Son, Edinburgh, 1988, at p83.
115 See also WL Morrison, "The Quantum of Proof in Relation to Motions for Non-Suit and Verdicts by
Direction" in HH Glass (ed), Seminars on Evidence, Law Book Co, Sydney, 1970.
116 (1863) 2 H & C 722; 159 ER 299.
117 Two years later in Scott v London and St Katherine Docks Co (1865) 3 H & C 596 at 601; 159 ER 665 at
667 Erie CJ enunciated the basis of the res ipsa loquitur doctrine in terms that have subsequently
been consistently applied in Australia, New Zealand and England: 'There must be reasonable
evidence of negligence. But where the thing is shown to be under the management of the defendant
or his servants, and the accident is such as in the ordinary course of things does not happen if those
who have the management use proper care, it affords reasonable evidence, in the absence of
explanation by the defendants, that the accident arose from want of care." See later Moore v R Fox &
Sons [1965] 1 QB 596 at 611; Schellenberg v Tunnel Holdings Pty Ltd [2000] HCA 18 at [2Iff].
118 See eg Nominal Defendant v Halbauer (1967) 117 CLR 448; GIO v Fredrichberg (1968) 118 CLR 403.
119 Hawke's Bay Motor v Russell [1972] NZLR 542.
120 Temple v Terrace Co (1966) 57 DLR (2d) 631. More recently, however, the Supreme Court of Canada has
repudiated the doctrine in Fontaine v British Columbia (Official Administrator) [1998] 1 SCR 424; see
further M Mclnnes, "The Death of Res Ipsa Loquitur in Canada" (1998) 114 Law Quarterly Review 547.
121 Moore v Fox [1956] 1 QB 596; but see Lloyde v West Midlands Gas [1971] 1 WLR 749 at 755; see further
PS Atiyah, "Res Ipsa Loquitur in England and Australia" (1972) 35 Modern Law Review 337.
122 Anchor Products Ltd v Hedges (1966) 115 CLR 493 at 500 per Windeyer J; Schellenberg v Tunnel
Holdings Pty Ltd [2000] HCA 18 at [72] per Gaudron J.
123 Schellenberg v Tunnel Holdings Pty Ltd [2000] HCA 18 at [98] per Kirby J.
124 For instance, there is ongoing uncertainty in Australia about whether the maxim is applicable to
medical negligence cases: see eg Elliott v Bickerstaff [1999] NSWCA 453.
125 See I Freckelton, Criminal Injuries Compensation: Law, Practice and Policy, LBC, Sydney, 2001.
126 Criminal Law (Sentencing) Act 1988 (SA), s53.
127 Arguably, s50 of the Sentencing Act 1991 (Vic) enables this to be done to some extent.
128 See eg R v Webb [1971] VR 147 at 150-1.
129 See eg Rv Mallinder (1986) 23 A Crim R 179 at 184-5.
130 See Agius (2000) 115 A Crim R 387 at 389, 401; Feldtnan v Samuels [1956] SASR 55 at 57; Mayne (1987)
137 LSJS 100 at 101; Boyd v The Queen [1975] VR 168 at 172.
See also Teremoana (1990) 49 A Crim R 207 at 208; Royall (1991) 172 CLR 378 al 398-9; 412, 451. Compare
Inkson (1996) 88 A Crim R 334.
131 See eg Wiidkey, Boogna and Charles (1994) 76 A Crim R 302 at 318.
132 [1999] HCA 54; (1999) 108 A Crim R 464.
133 R v Storey [1998] 1 VR 359.
134 Newton v The Queen (1982) 77 Cr App R 13; see also R v Gandy [1990] Crim LR 346. See Z Cowen & PB
Carter, Essays on the law of Evidence, Greenwood Press, Westport, 1955, at p242ff about the earlier
confusion in relation to standard of proof applied by the English courts in a variety of contexts.
135 In relation to matters where potentially confusing statistics are a feature of the evidence, one option is
the increased use of court-appointed experts. For a case example of this device, see R Coulam & SE
Fienberg, "The Use of Court-Appointed Statistical Experts: A Case Study" in MH De Groot, SE
Fienberg & JB Kadane (eds), Statistics and the Law, John Wiley & Sons, New York, 1986.
136 See Daubert v Merrell Dow Pharmaceuticals, 125 L Ed (2d) 469; 113 S Ct 2786 (1993); Kumho Tire Co Ltd
v Carmichael, United States Supreme Court, 23 March 1999; see also R v Johnston (1992) 69 CCC 395
at 415; R v Meleragni (1992) 73 CCC (3d) 348 at 352; R v Calder, unreported, High Court of New
Zealand, 12 April 1995; R v Brown, unreported, High Court of New Zealand, 19 September 1997.
137 See WA Silverman, Where's the Evidence? Controversies in Medicine, Oxford University Press, Oxford,
1998; S Hamer & G Collinson, Achieving Evidence-Based Practice, B Tindall, Edinburgh, 1999; DF
Friedland, Evidence-Based Medicine: A Framework for Clinical Practice, Appleton & Lange, Stamford,
1998.