Part E:
Causation, Evidence and Proof in Law
and Medicine
17 Causation in Law and Psychiatry
RALPH SLOVENKO*
In the law-psychiatry intermix, causation involving mental illness can, broadly
speaking, be categorised: (1) behaviour as a result of mental illness, and (2)
mental illness as a result of a stressor.
Behaviour as a Result of Mental Illness
People rarely ask if praiseworthy behaviour is a product of mental illness, though
it is sometimes asked about the creativity of artists (as in the case of Vincent van
Gogh), but on the other hand, when a person harms someone, the question is
invariably raised whether the behaviour is a result of mental illness. If the
behaviour is a result or product of mental illness, society will act one way; if not,
society will take a different stance. Social convention brings sick people to
doctors; evil people, on the other hand, go to jail.
Time and again, forensic experts are asked to say whether the behaviour of the
individual is fundamentally the result or product of mental illness or merely
representative of a lifestyle. Put another way, the question is raised whether the
person's behaviour or thoughts are ego-dystonic or ego-syntonic (that is, viewed
by the self as repugnant or inconsistent with the total personality, or as
acceptable and consistent with the total personality).
Every test of responsibility, whether in criminal or civil law, contains a product
or "on account of" mental illness question. That is, was a pathological condition,
like a human agent, the motivating force behind the act? A person compelled to
commit an act (crime or contract) at gunpoint is not held responsible. Likewise,
according to logic, mental illness may threaten a person and force him or her to
do things he would not ordinarily do. Not long ago, the blame was put on the
devil.
In Edward Oxford's trial in 1840, Lord Denman instructed the jury, "If some
controlling disease was, in truth, the acting power within him which he could not
resist, then he will not be held responsible".1 Under the M'Naghten Rules set out
by the House of Lords in 1843, the accused, to be deemed not responsible, must
suffer from a disease of the mind so severe as to render him or her incapable of
knowing the nature and quality of the act or of knowing that the act was wrong.2
The American Law Institute's test of 1955, which has also been widely adopted,
provides that a "person is not responsible for criminal conduct if at the time of
such conduct as a result of mental illness or defect, his capacity either to
appreciate the criminality of his conduct or to conform his conduct to the
requirements of law is so substantially impaired that he cannot justly be held
responsible" (emphasis added).3 The Federal Insanity Defense Reform Act
exculpates a defendant when as "as a result of a severe mental disease or defect,
he was unable to appreciate the nature and quality or wrongfulness of his act"
(emphasis added).
An act is not the result of mental illness merely because of the presence of
mental illness. Looking at a movie is not a pathological act although, at the time,
the person viewing the film may be pathologically depressed. Correlation is not
causation – there is correlation but not causation of summertime with an increase
in crime. Correlation and causation can be distinguished by experimentation.
The interactions between mental illness and criminality may be summarised:
(1) Mental illness may simply coexist with criminality, without having any causal
significance; (2) mental illness may predispose toward criminality, as in the case
of M'Naghten's delusion that he was the victim of persecution by the Prime
Minister of England, or it may be due to a compulsion, ranging from paraphilias,
impulse disorders, Tourette's syndrome, post-traumatic stress disorder (eg,
"Vietnam syndrome") to automatism; and (3) the mental illness may inhibit
criminality, as catatonia would inhibit a person who otherwise would commit a
rape.4 The commission of a crime, it must also be noted, may cause mental illness
rather than mental illness being the cause of the crime; facing prosecution or
punishment is a significant stressor and potentially pathogenic.
In 1954, in Durham v United States Judge David Bazelon of the United States
Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia formulated a "disease-defect-
product" test. Trial judges attempted to instruct juries on the meaning of the rule.
Three years later, seeking to clarify it, the DC Court of Appeals said:
When we say the defense of insanity requires that the act be a "product of" a disease, we mean that the
facts on the record are such that the trier of the facts is enabled to draw a reasonable inference that the
accused would not have committed the act he did commit if he had not been diseased as he was. There
must be a relationship between the disease and the act, and that relationship, whatever it may be in
degree, must be. . . critical in its effect in respect to the act. By "critical" we mean decisive, determinative,
causal; we mean to convey the idea inherent in the phrases "because of", "except for", "without which",
"but for", "effect of", "result of", "causative factor"; the disease made the effective or decisive difference
between doing and not doing the act. The short phrases "product of" and "causal connection" are not
intended to be precise, as though they were chemical formulae. They mean that the facts concerning the
disease and the facts concerning the act are such as to justify reasonably the conclusion that "But for this
disease the act would not have been committed."
To the precise logician deduction of the foregoing inference involves a tacit assumption that if the disease
had not existed the person would have been a law-abiding citizen. This latter is not necessarily factually
true and can rarely, if ever, be proved, but in the ordinary conduct of these cases we make that tacit
assumption. For ordinary purposes we make no mention of this logician's nicety, (emphasis added.)5
The widely adopted formula set out in 1955 in the ALI Model Penal Code,
which contains a combination of the right-wrong test and an updated version of
irresistible impulse, does not resolve the questions presented by the Durham
formula. The issues persist. The ALI formula, as we have noted, provides that the
impairment of cognition or control must be "a result of mental disease or defect".
The M'Naghten test asks the same about impairment of cognition. The Durham
formula brought "result" or "product" to centre-stage. It asked a more direct
question: was the defendant's conduct itself the "product" of mental illness?
Causal nexus between behaviour and illness is asked as well in other areas of
the law. The test on competency to stand trial asks whether the incompetency
was a result of mental illness. The law on civil commitment asks whether on
account of mental illness the person is dangerous or in need of care or treatment.
The law of contracts provides that certain people should not be held responsible
for their agreements if they were mentally ill and as a consequence did not know
what they were doing. The law on testamentary capacity asks whether mental
illness prevented the testator from realising the nature and extent of his or her
property or the natural objects of his or her bounty. A testament that is "the
direct unqualified offspring of a morbid delusion" is null and void.
The question arises: does major mental disorder equal violent tendencies?
From early times, a relationship between mental disorder and violence was
recognised. The Talmud said, "No man commits a crime except when a spirit of
madness has entered into him". On the other hand, it has been claimed that
psychotic people are not particularly prone to be assaultive. Following the
Kennedy assassination, an American Psychiatric Association study claimed that
the incidence of criminal behaviour among discharged patients of mental
institutions was not significantly higher than among the general population.6
Another study estimated the probability of violent behaviour in this category of
seriously mentally ill persons at five in 10,000.7 The MacArthur Risk Assessment
Study found that 27 per cent of released male and female patients committed at
least one violent act within a mean of four months after discharge.8 Dr E Fuller
Torrey points out that, contrary to claims by advocates attempting to decrease the
stigma against mental illness, random community surveys indicate that seriously
mentally ill individuals are significantly more dangerous than the general
population. He observed: "The frequency with which individuals with
schizophrenia reported having use a weapon in a fight - 21.5 times more than
individuals with no psychiatric disorder - is especially noteworthy."9
Current research points to a high incidence of mental disorder among
individuals who have committed violent crimes. Although there is general
agreement that individuals with certain characteristics of mental disorder are
more prone to violence than other individuals, there is still debate concerning the
prevalence of violent behaviour among various diagnostic groups. Current data
suggest that schizo-affective diagnosis, paranoid features, psychotic symptoms,
and substance abuse may all be associated with greater risk of serious violence.10
When, then, is it justified to posit a causal nexus between behaviour and
illness? How does one distinguish between behaviour that is a product of illness
and behaviour that is a reaction to it? When is mental disorder "causative" or
merely "correlated with" criminal behaviour? Does mental disorder "cause"
behaviour in the same sense that epilepsy "causes" seizures? What does it mean to
say that certain behaviour is a product or a feature of mental illness? Is the
answer anything more than opinion? The French philosopher Voltaire, a fervent
believer in free will, satirised the way people would excuse their brutal actions by
attributing them to a providential command. One could say that mental illness
tinges all aspects of the thought processes of the mentally ill individual, and that
every act of the individual is at least partially affected by mental illness. There
may be sick and healthy aspects of mental functioning within the same person.
The terms used by the legislatures or the courts - "product of", "a result of",
"causal connection", "because of", "causative factor" - are unsatisfying and
impenetrable.
There is the "bad seed" hypothesis. One belief is that criminals suffer a
physiological dysfunction that may be hereditary or result from trauma. Brain
lesions or tumours, temporal lobe epilepsy, blood chemistry changes, glandular
abnormality, and hypoglycemia are among the organic factors linked to
criminality. Is there a connection among genes, mental disorder, and violence?
Biological psychiatry holds that mental illness stems from a chemical imbalance
in the brain, and that many human traits are genetically influenced. In the past
few decades, the majority of researchers have endeavoured to show that
psychiatric disorders are triggered by chemical imbalances in the brain that can
be rectified with medication. The American Journal of Psychiatry is now almost
entirely organic psychiatry; it used to be biopsychosocial and before that,
psychosocial. Limitations on insurance coverage and developments in
neuroscience technology propel that direction.
With the focus increasingly on the organic, and on psychopharmacology, the
term "organic disorder" is eliminated from the American Psychiatric Association's
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual (DSM-IV) on the grounds that it is misleading
in implying that other psychiatric disorders do not have an organic component.11
In the 1960s a controversy arose over whether criminals have special
chromosome patterns. Some criminal defendants (presumably those with no
better alibi) presented expert testimony that they possessed an extra Y
chromosome, causing them to be legally insane at the time of the crime.12 The
defence in the trial of John Hinckley Jr, the would-be assassin of President
Reagan, submitted CAT scans to show a slightly shrunken brain.13 Andrei
Chikatilo, who murdered 52 people over a 12-year period in Russia, requested
that, following his execution, his brain be dissected to learn why he committed
the crimes.14 Advances in neurology, many neurological experts say, enable them
to probe the brain's anatomy and function to reveal abnormalities caused by
disease or trauma that may spark violence. They buttress a defence of not guilty
by reason of insanity ("NGRI") with brain scans and other tests that underscore
claims of derangement in a seemingly direct and objective way.
The nature-nurture controversy asks whether genetics (nature) or cultural and
experiential factors (nurture) is the more important determinant of human
behaviour. The nature-nurture debate became highly politicised in the early part
of the twentieth century. In 1933, shortly after assuming chancellorship of
Germany, Adolf Hitler convinced the Reichstag to pass the Law for the
Prevention of Genetically Diseased Offspring, a law closely patterned after a 1922
model statute drawn up in America. By that time the United States had carried
out about 20,000 sterilisations, most of them involuntary.
Nazi Germany's program evolved into "the destruction of unworthy life." The
Nazi program, with strong support from the medical community, was represented
as "applied eugenics" - the Nazis were carrying out "purification." In America, as
eugenicists and others favouring a genetic view of human behaviour became
linked in the public mind with events taking place in Germany, those favouring a
cultural view of human behaviour grew progressively stronger. Nature was
silenced, and nurture was Freudianised, as illustrated in the writings of Franz
Boas, Ruth Benedict and Margaret Mead. The name "Freud," once merely a
euphemism for sex, turned into a broader symbol of non-genetic approaches to
human behaviour.
The nature-nurture debate ended in 1946 at Nuremberg. Nature was put on
trial along with the Nazi leaders. Henceforth, theories, including Freud's,
extolling nurture as the primary antecedent of human behaviour would take
centre stage and encounter little intellectual opposition. Nurture ruled, but
instead of a competition against nature there was a debate among supporters of
nurture as to whether early childhood experiences or cultural factors were more
important determinants of human behaviour. By the mid-1950s the flow of
Freud's ideas through popular magazines reached fluvial proportions. On the
paediatric frontier, Dr Benjamin Spock was the Freudian missionary. Spock
taught that early childhood experiences, particularly those sexual in nature, are
crucial determinants for personality development.
The arguments about criminal behaviour became part of the broader nature-
nurture debate. By the early 1920s, Freudian theory was widely discussed in
criminology and forensic science. The question was whether criminals were born
as such or whether they were the products of early childhood experiences and
social forces. In Nazi Germany genetic theories of criminality had been
prominent, but in the aftermath of the Second World War, theorists about crime
in America could talk only about its social, economic and familial antecedents.
Treatment facilities to "cure" prisoners of their criminal behaviour were opened in
various states.
Experts nowadays frequently argue a neurological defense, even in cases of
seemingly calculated violence. They argue that the violence was actually the
uncontrollable by-product of damage to a specific region of the brain, caused
genetically or by years of physical abuse during childhood, but neurologists have
yet to demonstrate a necessary correlation between a non-limbic (frontal lobe)
abnormality in the brain and violent behaviour. Individuals convicted of violent
crimes do show a higher incidence of certain factors associated with brain
damage - abuse, head injuries, malnutrition, lower IQ, seizures, and subtle
neuropsychological deficits –than do people in control groups, but most people
thus afflicted do not commit violent crimes. In a number of writings, neurologist
Richard Restak has pointed out that the more complex and symbolically
meaningful the behaviour, the less likely it can be linked to a specific region of
the brain. The line of causation is hard to draw for premeditated acts of violence.
Neuropsychological examinations do not account for motivation.15
The kind of violent behaviour that results from damage to the limbic system,
unlike a non-limbic abnormality, is relatively easy to identify. People who suffer
from episodic dyscontrol - also known as intermittent explosive disorder - display
spells of violence grossly out of proportion to any preceding event. These
intermittent paroxysms of aggression strike out of nowhere, and the individual
expresses a genuine sense of regret when the spells pass.16
The appropriate insanity defence on these types of cases requires specification
and corroboration of symptoms of loss of reality-related cognition, or loss of
control during the crime, or both. For the needs of the courts, the important
questions are: What was the nature of the violent act and the circumstances
surrounding it? Does the defendant exhibit signs of neurological damage? If so, is
it likely with a reasonable degree of medical certainty that, absent the
neurological impairment, the violence would not have taken place?
Speculations about the relations between brain dysfunctions and behavioural
aberrations, however, do not form a proper basis for asserting, with the degree of
certainty required by the law, that a violent act was committed on the basis of
some form of neurological dysfunction. But that has not stopped experts from
testifying on the slimmest evidence. People who kill others often report
disturbances in consciousness, including depersonalisation and feelings of
unreality. It is not to be assumed that all such people are suffering from
neurological damage, especially since the same experiences are regularly reported
by people suffering from disturbances that are not considered neurological and
may occur in anyone. Assuming neurological damage simply because a person
has undergone some impairment in consciousness ignores studies that report 65
per cent of all murderers have amnesia for the act itself.17 It is always
questionable whether the dissociation took place before, during, or after the
killing.
Tracing criminal violence to a specific region in the brain is reminiscent of
ancient times when it was believed that demon possession caused mental illness,
and, in turn, unlawful behaviour. "The devil made me do it" is the old saying, or
in the Talmud's phrasing, "No man commits a crime except when a spirit of
madness has entered into him". Demonic possession is with us still, even if the
label is different. The various tests of criminal responsibility are grounded on
something like a demon possession theory. Although the criminal law tests do not
mention demons, mental illness, as used in these tests, is regarded essentially as a
form of demoniacal manipulation. Under the M'Naghten, Durham, or ALI rule, it
is necessary to establish that a disease or defect of the mind exists and impairs
cognition or control. The operational use of the concept illustrates what the
philosopher Alfred North Whitehead called "misplaced concreteness", that is, an
abstraction is reified: a process is turned into an entity. Restak pointed out how,
in our vocabulary, we tend to describe the mental processes mediated by our
brain as a machine. "He had a mental crack-up." "His mind is 'rusty' or unable to
'grind out' solutions to problems." At other times, our mind is "sharp as a razor"
or "really revved up", "the wheels are turning" within our heads. "His ego is easily
bruised." "His mind was shattered." "He went to pieces." "His mind just snapped
from the shock of it all."18
The terms "result of" and "product" in the test of criminal responsibility denote
separateness and imply a lineal causation. Behaviour is a unitary process, but,
with licence, it is spoken of in terms of either its subjective elements or its
outward appearances. It is like talking about the mind and body as though they
had separate existence. We do it because we do not have the language expressive
of continuous interactions with multiple or circular causality. Our language limits
us to a lineal step codification of reality and to a world of single one-to-one
causality. Dr Philip Q Roche wrote in his Isaac Ray award book:
In the language of the law, cause is regarded as an event which has direct or proximate connection in
sequence with another event, ... [W]e can recognize that, when viewed within a moral system, out of our
own psychological needs and design we are impelled arbitrarily to dichotomize behaviour into subjective
(motivational) and objective elements. This dichotomy sets and maintains the alignments of the
adversary system of resolving moral problems. At the same time, however, the dichotomy opens the door
to the realm of infinite differences which may come less out of actual differences in nature, and more out
of the differences in the persons who report and evaluate them. ... Seemingly, by an inner psychological
necessity we are impelled to abstract the outward act from the hypothetical subjective element and to
regard the act as a "product."19
The way society labels a particular cluster of mental characteristics
corresponds to how it feels about the individual, and society is constantly
changing its mind to accommodate competing policy interests. Society's
representatives may benefit from psychiatric expertise in determining which
cognitive and emotional characteristics are features of a diagnostic category, but
it is up to society, through its representatives, to decide whether a behaviour is a
product of mental illness or not. The decision of whether behaviour is a "product"
or a "result" of mental illness is not a matter of scientific expertise but a matter of
social policy.20 Under an amendment of the Federal Rules of Evidence, as
provided by Congress as part of the Insanity Defense Reform Act of 1984,21 the
expert may be asked whether the individual suffers a mental illness but the
expert may not be asked: "Was the accused able to appreciate the nature and
quality of his act?", "Was the accused able to appreciate the wrongfulness of his
acts?", or "Was the act the product of that disease or defect?" Taken literally,
under the amendment, the jury is to decide causation issues without the
assistance of expert testimony.
Mental Illness as a Result of a Stressor
Traditionally in a tort action, recovery at law for emotional distress was only
recognised as an additional or parasitic element of damages. Thus, where the
tortious conduct inflicted bodily harm, the ensuing emotional distress could be
taken into account in assessing damages. Emotional distress could be the sole
basis of a claim only in cases of intentional wrongdoing for assault, defamation,
false imprisonment, invasion of privacy, and malicious prosecution. In the mid
1950s, the courts in various states of the United States began to allow an action
for the intentional infliction of emotional distress, as when a jokester tells a
woman that her son has been mutilated in an accident.
In cases of negligence resulting in fright, shock, or other mental suffering, the
various jurisdictions have required proof of physical impact or injury. Over the
years, the law has been concerned about a flood of litigation or fraudulent claims
if compensation were awarded in cases of negligence alleging mental distress
without accompanying physical impact or injury. The physical impact or injury
would establish causal nexus. Of course, in all torts in which there is physical
injury, be it an intentional tort or negligence, damages are awarded for pain and
suffering.
Beginning in the mid-twentieth century, an increasing number of states in the
United States, one by one, removed the physical impact or injury limitation in
negligence actions. The law in a near majority of states has moved from that of
requiring physical impact or injury to allowing claims without insisting either
that the victim feared for his or her own safety or even suffered physical injury,
such as a heart attack or miscarriage. In 1968, a trend began in allowing an action
for mental distress even for bystanders witnessing negligent injury. That year, in
the famous case of Dillon v Legg,22 the California Supreme Court set out
standards for a bystander action: a close relationship to the person injured, close
proximity to the scene, and "sensory and contemporaneous observation" of the
accident. A number of jurisdictions have loosened the requirement that the
plaintiff has to be at the scene of the alleged act that caused the mental suffering.
In the Dillon case, the distressed mother was outside the zone of danger - there
was no possibility that she would be hit by the car that killed her daughter, but
she was at the scene.
Fear, when well founded, of becoming ill at a later date may also be
compensable. The question has arisen in litigation over toxic torts and latent
diseases, as in lawsuits brought by those who have been exposed to asbestos or
by the daughters of women who took the drug diethylstilbestrol (DES).23 In a
Wisconsin case, the plaintiff claimed damages for a physical injury and for her
phobia that she might develop a cancer from broken pieces of a catheter that
could not be removed from her body. The court said, without further explanation,
that "although there is no question about there being in fact a fear of future
cancer, the claim of damages (by way of cancer) is so remote and is so out of
proportion to the culpability of the tortfeasor that, as a matter of public policy,
we conclude that the defendants are not to be held liable for this element of
damages."24
The most frequently cited public policy factors a court will consider when
deciding whether liability should not attach to damages caused by a defendant's
negligence are: (1) The injury is too remote from the negligence; (2) the injury is
wholly out of proportion to the defendant's culpability; (3) in retrospect, it
appears extraordinary that the negligence would have brought about the harm;
(4) allowing recovery places an unreasonable burden on the defendant; (5)
allowing recovery is too likely to open the way for fraudulent claims; (6) allowing
recovery will enter a field having no sensible or just stopping point.
A psychiatric diagnostic category is not essential to a cause of action, but the
listing of stress reactions in the DSM has tended to give the claim more
legitimacy. Forensic psychiatrists pushed the listing of post-traumatic stress
disorder (PTSD) in the DSM. With the inclusion of PTSD, victims of trauma have
increasingly used that formulation in civil and criminal cases. As expert
witnesses, psychiatrists embrace PTSD to explain the psychological sequelae of
trauma in personal injury cases.
In tort litigation, PTSD is a favoured diagnosis in cases of emotional distress
because it is incident specific. It tends to rule out other factors important to the
determination of causation. Thus plaintiffs can argue that all of their
psychological problems issue from the alleged traumatic event and not from
myriad other sources encountered in life. A diagnosis of depression, in contrast,
opens the issue of causation to many factors other than the stated cause of action.
Questions asked on direct examination and cross-examination reflect the
concern over causation and malingering. "What is the relationship, if any", the
expert is asked, "between the trauma and the plaintiff's mental disorder?" "Can
the plaintiff work?" "What is the type and length of treatment required?" "What
part does litigation play in the plaintiff's mental illness?" "How do you know that
the plaintiff is not faking?" If the expert has concluded that the plaintiff is
suffering from PTSD, he or she is asked to explain it, at which time the plaintiff's
history is used to illustrate the DSM criteria for PTSD.
Wholly aside from the question of how far the law should go in protecting
against emotional disturbance, there are difficult evidentiary questions not only
of causation, but also of fault and assessment of damages. The vulnerability of the
victim is considered differently in each of these various elements that together
constitute a tort.
For fault, the risk reasonably to be perceived determines the duty of care.
Foreseeability is the traditional test. Thus a greater duty of care is imposed on a
motorist when he or she sees a handicapped person or child crossing the street.
When the vulnerability of a person is not reasonably apparent, he or she may
fairly be assumed to be an ordinary individual. Negligence is failing to observe
the care of a reasonable person in like circumstances.
For causation, the law looks for proximate cause. There is no litmus test for
determining proximity, and there may be more than one proximate cause. Some
courts use the foreseeability test in determining causation, as is done in
determining fault, but usually the courts say that for causation it is a question of
the objective evidence. For causation, there is the well-known expression, "the
tortfeasor must take his victim as he finds him", so peculiar vulnerability to harm
does not excuse. It may be argued, however, sometimes successfully, that "the
straw that broke the camel's back" is not a proximate cause.
So-called delayed PTSD may be the result of a cumulation of events resulting
in a crisis. (In law, the limitation period begins when the injury is made known.)
The proximate cause may arguably be either the earlier or a later event. The term
"proximate" has connotations of nearness in time, but that is not its meaning in
law. Legal cause and responsible cause are more appropriate terms, but those
terms also leave much room for vagaries in decision-making. In a number of
cases, the courts have said that the determination of proximate cause is the
province of judges, not juries, but more often than not, it is a decision left to the
jury.
In days gone by, when the term "traumatic neurosis" was used, psychiatrists
distinguished between a true traumatic neurosis in which a healthy individual
suffers emotional distress as a result of an overwhelming stress, and a triggered
neurosis, in which a vulnerable individual decompensates as a result of stress that
would be quite inconsequential to a healthy individual. Theoretically, in law,
however, the distinction is one without a difference, but in the case of a triggered
neurosis, the argument is made that a triggering event is not a proximate cause.
Trauma, of course, is a relative concept - stimulus in relation to the coping
ability of an individual - but when a stressor is not outside the range of common
experience, the evidence tends to support a finding that it is not a proximate
cause. Also, when a stressor is not outside the range of common experience,
suspicion arises of malingering.
In assessing damages, testimony of the condition of the claimant before and
after the occurrence of the stressor is crucial to the case. (Punitive damages are
another matter.) The forensic examiner is called on to make a long-term
assessment of impairment. The before-and-after testimony dwells on difference
in personality, character traits, and behaviour, such as outgoing versus
withdrawn, loving versus indifferent, mild-mannered versus abusive, reliable
versus erratic, and clean versus slovenly. When pre-existing psychological
problems are aggravated, accelerated, or reactivated by trauma, a court may have
qualms about ascribing the full injury to the defendant. As a matter of law, a jury
is to discount what would have happened anyhow.25
Actually, what difference does a diagnosis make when before-and-after
determines the measure of damage? In fact, a diagnosis is not necessary to
establish what the claimant was able to do before and after the trauma. Lay
witnesses can attest to that, but the DSM is state-of-the-art, and the forensic
expert is invariably asked to label the claimant's suffering.
Theoretically a diagnosis informs about prognosis. In general, claimants have
an obligation to minimise their damages. In some cases, PTSD symptoms
diminish over time, in association with many differing factors, whereas in other
cases, they do not diminish and in fact may worsen in the absence of treatment.
A wide variety of factors may affect the course of PTSD, including coping
mechanisms, social support, type and duration of stress, family functioning,
personality, other disorders and so on.
Syndrome Evidence
The search for evidence, particularly in child abuse cases, has led to a new species
of medical evidence: the "syndrome" diagnosis. This type of evidence, designed to
establish a stressor, apparently originated historically in radiology and clinical
observation. John Caffey, the father of paediatric radiology, spent 20 years trying
to fit the bony abnormalities seen on childhood x-rays into known syndromes.
He noted abnormalities that must be associated with child abuse as they were not
seen in any known disease.26 In 1962, Dr C Henry Kempe drew the attention of
the medical profession to a set of presenting symptoms for which he coined the
term "battered child syndrome".27
The term "syndrome" is well known in the medical community as being "a
running together", a "sundromos " in the Greek, or as the Oxford English
Dictionary puts it, "a concurrence of several symptoms in a disease". Normally a
syndrome is regarded as being identifiable when a collection of symptoms occurs
together so often that they provide a recognisable clinical entity. There is
controversy, however, over the admissibility of "syndrome" evidence in criminal
or tort cases to establish either that a particular traumatic event or stressor
actually occurred or to explain the behaviour of the victim. In a child abuse case
a psychiatrist or psychologist is presented to testify that the child exhibits the
characteristics of a sexually abused child and that, by implication, the child was
sexually abused.28 (Experts use the term "rape trauma syndrome" in the case of a
young girl as well as in the case of an adult woman, and they tend to use the
term "sexually abused child syndrome" in the case of a child of tender years or
when the offender is a family member.)29 Because the defence in these cases is
usually that the abuse did not occur and that the child is making it up, the
testimony is designed to bolster the credibility of the child.30
Proponents of syndrome evidence argue that it is probative and logical. After
all, what could seem more sensible than to look for patterns? In medical
diagnosis, of course, the symptoms of an individual are compared with a pattern
and a conclusion is drawn about aetiology. As the comedian Jimmy Durante once
put it, "If something looks like a duck, walks like a duck, and quacks like a duck,
it must be a duck". Some courts call it the "the duck test". Its application should be
cautious, however, when it is based only on symptoms. Dr Albert Drukteinis put
it thus: Medical conditions, generally, can be defined on different levels,
depending on structural pathology, etiology, deviation from some physiological
norm, observable signs or symptom presentation. As definitions move from more
objective criteria of identifiable and measurable pathology to symptom
presentation only, they change from disease to syndrome. Therefore, a syndrome
is more likely to include arbitrary or subjective criteria, and to lie in a more gray
area of certainty. However, by using the term "syndrome", a word which has its
roots in medicine, the symptom pattern described gains medical legitimacy.31
Certain assumptions about psychological evidence to ascertain a stressor are
particularly questionable. One is the assumption that a certain post-traumatic
stress syndrome is the pathway of a particular kind of stressor. In actuality, a
wide variety of stressors may result in the trauma. Second is the assumption that
victims of a particular stressor react in the same manner. Moreover, it would be
surprising for someone to have no other stressors in his or her life other than the
one associated with the alleged event.
In actuality, the impact of stressors depend upon the interaction between
predisposition and environmental influence. One person may break down;
another may be stoic. In short, not all victims react with the same characteristics,
and many persons with these characteristics have not been abused but instead,
may be suffering from something else, or they may be malingering or acting
hysterically.32
Freud's patients recalled their trauma "with all the feelings that belong to the
original experience". In 1895-96, Freud, in listening to his female patients, felt that
something dreadful and violent lay in their past. The psychiatrists before Freud
who had heard seduction stories believed their patients to be hysterical liars and
dismissed their memories as fantasy. Freud believed that his patients were
reporting the actuality. However, some nine years later he publicly retracted his
theory about the aetiology of hysteria. His patients, he now said in an about-face,
had been deceiving themselves and him, "I was at last obliged to recognize that
these scenes of seduction had never taken place, and that they were only fantasies
that my patients had made up."33 Other therapists, however, find that the incest
fantasies of their patients are based on a history of incest.34 "Revival of memory"
therapists link problems of depression, eating disorders, and multiple personality
disorder to childhood sexual abuse.35
Therapists who "uncover" dissociative identity disorder claim that its genesis is
childhood abuse, so in every case of dissociative identity disorder, they say, an
allegation of child abuse is warranted. In a 1988 article in Psychiatric Annals,
Daniel Hardy, a psychiatrist who also holds a law degree, wrote, "The psychiatrist
or therapist must be alert to the potential danger of a malpractice suit arising
from failure to diagnose multiple personality disorder".36
As it turned out, just the opposite has happened, to wit, diagnosing or
uncovering dissociative identity disorder has been regarded as malpractice, which
follows the proposition that dissociative identity disorder is treatment-created or
sometimes the result of self-hypnosis. Dr Paul McHugh, chairman of the
Department of Psychiatry and Behavioural Science at Johns Hopkins, wrote, "
[Dissociative identity disorder] is an iatrogenic behaviour syndrome, promoted
by suggestion and maintained by clinical attention". He noted that multiple
identities disappear when the therapist does not ask about them, take notes about
them, or otherwise take an interest in them.37
So, out of concern for relevance, comes the legal question: Does the victim's
clinically observed emotional trauma support the allegation about the stressor? In
the usual tort or criminal case, an act is not in dispute - say, an automobile
accident - but rather causation and damages are in dispute. In a turnaround, in
cases involving syndrome evidence, symptoms are offered as evidence that a
certain act occurred, but is trauma stressor specific? Is there something peculiar
about the trauma suffered by a victim of a tort or crime that is different from the
trauma suffered as a result of other stressors such as a hurricane or an automobile
accident? Are subcategories of PTSD warranted - such as "sexually abused child
syndrome", "rape trauma syndrome", "battered spouse", "battered elderly", or
"incest trauma"?38 These terms have developed to encompass the recurrent
pattern of certain victims. Should they be elevated to the level of diagnostic
nomenclature? Should they simply all be called PTSD? They are not listed as
separate syndromes in the DSM, the state of the art, but who knows, perhaps
some day they will.
A number of appellate decisions have been rendered on syndrome evidence.
For some purposes, some appellate courts have recognised a number of categories
of PTSD and have allowed testimony on them.39 In rulings followed by many
other courts, the California Supreme Court has admitted testimony on the
battered child syndrome to prove child abuse but has excluded the rape trauma
syndrome to prove that a rape had occurred. In People v Bledsoe,40 the California
Supreme Court made an attempt at explanation, saying that expert testimony
concerning the battered child syndrome is admissible because that concept was
devised for the purpose of determining whether a child's injuries were
intentionally inflicted.
Dr Kempe's formulation of the syndrome, however, was based on physical
evidence. Put another way, the physical injuries sustained by the child do not
form any injury pattern normally sustained by children in day-to-day activities.
The "battered child syndrome" indicated that the injuries suffered by the child
were not the result of an accident. Following Dr Kempe's formulation, courts in
various jurisdictions allowed an expert medical witness to express an opinion
that a child exhibits the battered child syndrome. In these cases the expert is
permitted to give an opinion as to the cause of a particular injury, either on the
basis of the expert's deduction from the appearance of the injury itself of from the
syndrome.
Sexual child abuse, on the other hand, often leaves no physical injuries on
which a diagnosis of "battered child syndrome" could be based. And what about
an alleged rape? Should a rape counsellor or other mental health professional be
permitted to testify to an individual's post-incident emotional trauma - "a
constellation of symptoms experienced by the victims of sexual assault" or "rape
trauma syndrome" - in order to prove that a rape in fact occurred (or a "sexual
abuse syndrome" to prove that molestations occurred)? In a rape case, it is argued
that the complainant would not suffer the symptoms if she had consented to the
sexual act.41 (Consent is no defence, of course, in cases of sexual abuse involving
children. In these cases, the issue is whether it occurred or whether the accused is
the perpetrator.)
In Bledsoe, the California Supreme Court noted that the rape trauma syndrome
is a fundamentally different concept from the battered child syndrome because
the "[the rape trauma syndrome] was not devised to determine the truth or
accuracy of a particular past event". Rather, the court said, it is "a therapeutic
tool" used to treat victims by counsellors who consciously "avoid judging the
credibility of their clients".42 The distinction has been widely but not always
followed.43 Actually any of the PTSDs are treatable without regard to the nature
of the stressor or even whether a stressor actually occurred. (The "rape crisis
centre" could be "crisis centre" for all people in emotional distress.)
While courts have more often rejected than accepted "rape trauma syndrome"
in establishing the stressor, they have allowed evidence of a "child sexual abuse
syndrome" to show that the child was sexually abused. As a result of the concern
about child abuse, in the trial of accused child molesters, many courts in recent
years in the United States have allowed mental health professionals to testify that
the psychological problems of a child are evidence that abuse has in fact
occurred.44 Other courts draw a distinction without a difference, saying that an
expert may testify that the particular behaviour of the child was characteristic of,
or "consistent with", the behaviour pattern of child sexual abuse victims
generally, but the expert may not testify about whether the victim's allegations
are truthful or whether sexual abuse did occur.45
In proving the rape of an adult, however, many courts like the California
Supreme Court in Bledsoe, have concluded that rape trauma syndrome does not
meet the standard of general acceptance in the scientific community.46 The court
emphasised, however, that while such testimony is not admissible for the purpose
of proving that a rape occurred, it may be admissible for other purposes, such as
explaining to the jury certain popular myths concerning rape victims. It may be
used to explain a delay in reporting. Likewise, in battered spouse cases,
prosecutors call mental health professionals as expert witnesses to explain the
individual's failure to make a timely report for fear of reprisal, fear of being
blamed, and fear of terminating the relationship.47 Quite frequently the
prosecutor seeks to introduce evidence to explain behaviour unique to victims of
sexual assault in order to enhance the credibility of its witnesses. Some child or
adult victims of sexual assault, for example, may fear retaliation and may delay
reporting the crime for a longer period than the victims of other crimes. Others
may delay out of shame; still, others may recant their earlier allegations. The
"child sexual abuse accommodation syndrome" (developed by Dr Roland Summit)
has as its premise that children do not lie about sexual abuse, but change their
stories for other reasons.48
Promptness in the report of a crime tends to be taken as evidence of reliability.
It is regarded as an indication that the accusation is not a concoction. Indeed, the
law of evidence regards spontaneity of a statement as an indicium of trust or
trustworthiness and makes an exception for it in the rule against hearsay.49 How
can a prosecutor deal with a delay in reporting, or with a recanting of the story?
In Bledsoe, the court said: "[I]n such a context expert testimony on rape trauma
syndrome may play a particularly useful role by disabusing the jury of some
widely held misconceptions about rape and rape victims, so that it may evaluate
the evidence free of the constraints of popular myths."50 Thus, in another case, in
Washington, a worker at a "sexual assault centre" was allowed to testify that in
over 50 per cent of sexual abuse cases involving children there is a delay in
reporting.51
Syndromes are multiplying. In the 1970s, there was much publicity about a
disorder called the "Stockholm Syndrome." The presenting symptom of this
affliction affected hostages who, showed signs of sympathy for the captors who
had terrorised them. This condition was offered as an explanation for Patty
Hearst's taking part alongside her former captors in a bank robbery. Not much is
heard now about the "Stockholm Syndrome"; but we hear a lot about many
others. The Montana Supreme Court upheld an award to a farmer because the
state's nearby highway construction was stressful to his pigs. A veterinarian gave
expert testimony about "porcine stress syndrome".52 After a few days in
Jerusalem, the Holy City, apparently normal pilgrims imagine they are biblical
figures. The Holy City derangement is labelled "Jerusalem Syndrome".
In Werner v State,53 Judge Marvin Teague of the Texas Court of Criminal
Appeals described the proliferation in this way: "Today, we have the following
labels: 'The Battered Wife Syndrome'; 'The Battered Child Syndrome'; 'The
Battered Husband Syndrome'; 'The Battered Patient Syndrome'; 'The Familial
Child Sexual Abuse Syndrome'; 'The Rape Trauma Syndrome'; 'The Battle Fatigue
Syndrome'; 'The Vietnam Post-Traumatic Stress Syndrome'; 'The Policeman's
Syndrome'; 'The Whiplash Syndrome'; 'The Low-Back Syndrome'; 'The Lover's
Syndrome'; 'The Love Fear Syndrome'; 'The Organic Delusional Syndrome'; and
'The Holocaust Syndrome.' Tomorrow, there will be additions to the list, such as
'The Appellate Court Judge Syndrome'."
Werner involved the admissibility of evidence on the "Holocaust Syndrome",
offered in support of a plea of self-defence (just as evidence of "battered spouse"
is offered to establish a lower threshold of self-defence). The syndrome is one
exhibited by children of survivors of the Nazi Holocaust who grew up hearing
the stories from their parents of how entire Jewish families perished in the
concentration camps during the Second World War without resisting. These
children have formed a firm determination that if their lives are ever threatened,
they will immediately resist forcibly and not permit injustice to be foisted upon
them. This mind-set makes them vulnerable to precipitous use of deadly force in
what they believe is self-defence when confronted with assaultive behaviour.
In this case, a psychiatrist would have testified (if allowed) that the defendant
showed "some" of the characteristics of the syndrome associated with children of
survivors of Nazi concentration camps. He would also have testified "that one
does not need to be thinking of an event for another event in one's life to have an
effect, a subconscious effect on him". The State objected to the proffered
testimony on the ground of relevancy; that is, if self-defence is urged, the test to
be applied is "the standard of an ordinary and prudent person in the defendant's
position at the time of the offence". The majority of the Texas Court of Criminal
Appeals, agreed; but Judge Teague, while mocking the proliferating phenomenon
of syndrome evidence, argued in dissent that the "Holocaust Syndrome" should be
given the same deference as the "Battered Spouse Syndrome", or other syndrome,
that is allowed to explain the effects of abuse on the condition of a defendant's
mind.
It remains a controversial issue whether syndrome evidence should be
admissible as evidence to establish that a specific stressor has in fact occurred.
Because symptoms of a psychological nature are not stressor-specific, the "duck
test" is of questionable value. These symptoms do not imply aetiology. With few
exceptions, the DSM does not set out the aetiology of the disorders.54 A wide
variety of stressors may give rise to a given symptom, which may also be
attributable to normal developmental variations.55 During a therapy session, the
poet Anne Sexton asked, "Do I make up a trauma to go with my symptoms?"
As we have noted, a number of courts have allowed evidence of PTSD to
explain the behaviour of the victim in delaying a report or in recanting, while
they have been divided on allowing it to establish the nature of a stressor or
whether any stressor in fact occurred. To disallow syndrome evidence to directly
prove an occurrence but to allow it to indirectly prove an occurrence by proving
the complainant's credibility is to draw a distinction without a difference,56 In
either case, the aim in the last analysis is to establish the occurrence of a stressor,
either directly or through the truthfulness of the complainant. Explaining the
delay in reporting by syndrome evidence is to enhance the credibility of the
complaining witness and thereby, in effect, to establish the stressor. It is yet
another way around the bar on credibility testimony.
To sum up
In the law-psychiatry intermix, public policy very much determines whether
certain behaviour will be considered to be the result of mental illness, or whether
mental illness will be considered to be the result of a particular stressor. Quite
often psychiatric input is allowed to assist in reaching a decision. Forensic experts
are asked to say whether the behaviour of the individual is fundamentally the
result or product of mental illness and they are asked to say whether mental
illness is the result of a particular stressor.
* Professor of Law and Psychiatry at Wayne State University in Michigan, a member of the American,
Kansas, Louisiana, and Michigan Bar Associations, a scientific associate of the American Academy of
Psychoanalysis, and amicus of the American Academy of Psychiatry and Law.
1 R v Oxford (1843) 9 CNP 525.
2 M'Naghten Case (1843) 10 Clark & Fin 200, 8 ER 718.
3 ALI Model Penal Code §4.01 (1955).
4 See P Dietz, "'The Mentally Disordered Offender: Patterns in the Relationship between Mental Disorder
and Crime" (1992) 15 Psych Clin North America 539; J Monahan & HJ Steadman, "Crime and Mental
Disorder: An Epidemiological Approach" in M
Tonry & N Morris (eds), Crime and Justice; An Annual Review of Research, No 4, University of Chicago
Press, Chicago, 1983, 145.
5 Carter v United States, 252 F 2d 608, 617 (DC Cir 1957).
6 Reported in JR Rappeport (ed), The Clinical Evaluation of the Dangerousness of the Mentally Ill,
Thomas, Springfield, IL, 1967; see also SB Guze, Criminality and Psychiatric Disorders, Oxford
University Press, New York, 1976.
7 H Hafner & W Boker, Crimes of Violence by Mentally Abnormal Offenders, Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge, 1982.
8 Cited in J Monahan, "Mental Disorder and Violent Behaviour/Perceptions and Evidence" (1992)
American Psychologist 47.
9 M Moran, "Seriously Mentally Ill Do Have Higher Rates of Violence, Torrey Reports" (19 November
1993) Psychiatric News 5.
10 S Hodgins (ed), Mental Disorder and Crime, Sage, Newbury Park, CA, 1993.
11 RL Spitzer, MB First, JBW Williams, K Kendler, HA Pincus & G Tucker, "Now Is the Time to Retire the
Term 'Organic Mental Disorders'" (1992) 149 Amer J Psychiatry 240.
12 PJ Farrell, "The XYY Syndrome in Criminal Law: An Introduction" (1969) 44 St John's L Rev 217.
13 AP news release, "Witness Talks of Hinckley's Brain Scans," 2 June 1982.
14 W Sloane (AP news release), "Russian Cannibal Convicted in Killings," 15 October 1992.
15 RM Restak, "See No Evil/The Neurological Defense Would Blame Violence on the Damaged Brain"
(July-August 1992) Sciences 16.
16 Ibid.
17 Reported in R Restak, "Violence and the Brain" (November-December 1992) Sciences, p4.
18 R Restak, The Brain Has a Mind of Its Own, Crown, New York, 1991, pl8.
19 PQ Roche, The Criminal Mind/A Study of Communication Between the Criminal Law and Psychiatry,
Greenwood Press. Westport CT, 1958, pp259-60.
20 B Bursten, Beyond Psychiatric Expertise, Thomas, Springfield, IL, 1984,
2l Federal Rules of Evidence 704(b), as amended.
22 68 Cal 2d 728, 441 P 2d 912, 69 Cal Rptr 72 (1968).
23 See, eg, Gideon v Johns-Manville Sales Corp, 761 F 2d 1129 (5th Cir 1985) (asbestos-related cancer);
Techalloy Co v Reliance Ins Co, 338 Pa Super 1, 487 A2d 820 (1984) (toxic chemicals); Payton v Abbott
Laboratories, 386 Mass 540, 437 NE 2d 171 (1982) (diethylstilbestrol).
24 Howard v Mt Sinai Hosp, 63 Wis 2d 515, 219 NW 2d 576 (1974).
25 Steinhauser v Hertz Corp, 421 F 2d 1169 (2d Cir 1970).
26 J Caffey, "Pediatric X-Ray Diagnosis," in Yearbook, Medical Publishers, Chicago, 7th edn, 1978, pl335; J
Caffey, "The Parent-Infant Traumatic Stress Syndrome" (1972) 114 Am J Radiology 218.
27 CH Kempe, FN Silverman, BF Steele, W Droegemueller & HJ Silver, "The Battered Child Syndrome"
(1962) 181 J Am Med Assn 17.
28 See, eg, People v James, 451 NW 2d 611 (Mich App 1990).
29 See, eg, People v Bledsoe, 36 Ca! 3d 236, 203 Cal Rptr 450, 681 P 2d 291(1984); State v McCoy, 400 NW 2d
807 (Minn App 1987).
30 RJ Roe, "Expert Testimony in Child Sexual Abuse Cases" (1985) 40 U Miami L Rev 97.
31 AM Drukteninis. "Overlapping Somatoform Syndromes in Personal Injury Litigation," presented at the
annual meeting on 30 March 2000 of the American College of Forensic Psychiatry in Newport Beach,
CA.
32 See PR McHugh, "How Psychiatry Lost its Way" Commentary, December 1999. p32: Note, "Unreliability
of Expert Testimony on Typical Characteristics of Sexual Abuse Victims" (1980) 74 Georgetown L J
429.
33 See JM Masson, "Freud and the Seduction Theory" (February 1984) Atlantic. p33. See also DP Spence,
Narrative Truth and Historical Truth/Meaning and Interpretation in Psychoanalysis, Norton, New
York, 1982.
34 Reported by Dr Bertram Karon of Michigan State University in an address on delusions presented at a
meeting of the Detroit Psychoanalytic Society, 11 April 1987, in Ann Arbor, MI.
35 See WM Grove & RC Barden, "Protecting the Integrity of the Legal System: The Admissibility of
Testimony from Mental Health Experts Under Daubert/Kumho Analyses" (1999) 5 Psychology, Public
Policy and Law 224.
36 DW Hardy, "Multiple Personality: Failure to Diagnose and the Potential for Malpractice Liability" (1988)
18 Psychology Annals 543.
37 P McHugh, "Psychiatric Misadventures" (Autumn 1992) American Scholar, p497.
38 For a discussion, see DW Shuman, "The Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders in the
Courts" (1989) 17 Bull Amer Acad Psych & Law 25.
39 Evidence of rape trauma syndrome was allowed in State v Marks, 231 Kan 645, 647 P 2d 1292 (1982), but
was rejected in State v Saldana, 324 NW 2d 227 (Minn 1982). See Annot, "Admissibility, at Criminal
Prosecution, of Expert Testimony on Rape Trauma Syndrome," 42 ALR 4th 879 (1985).
40 36 Cal 3d 236, 203 Cal Rptr 450, 681 P 2d 291 (1984).
41 In United States v Wesson, 779 F 2d 1443 (9th Cir 1986), the Ninth Circuit allowed a doctor's testimony
that the alleged rape victim's injuries were not consistent with consensual intercourse to "aid the jury
in determining the credibility of the alleged victim's claim that the intercourse was nonconsensual."
779 F 2d at 1444. Similarly, in Henson v State, 535 NE 2d 1189 (Ind 1989), the Indiana Supreme Court
held that "fundamental fairness" required that the defense be allowed to present rape trauma
syndrome evidence to show that the victim's behaviour was inconsistent with that of a rape victim.
See also United States v Rivera, 43 F 3d 1291 (9th Cir 1995); State v Wilkerson, 295 NC 559, 247 SE 2d
905 (1978): People v Whitfield, 425 Mich 116, 388 NW 2d 206 (1986).
42 The Bledsoe case involved a 28-year-old offender and a 14-year-old victim.
43 In Spencer v General Electric Co, 688 F Supp 1072 (ED Va 1988); Commonwealth v Zamarripa, 379 Pa
Super 20, 549 A 2d 980 (Pa Super Ct 1988). There are decisions to the contrary. See, eg, State v
Allewalt, 308 Md 89, 517 A 2d 741 (1986). See TM Massaro, "Experts, Psychology, Credibility and
Rape: The Rape Trauma Syndrome Issue and its Implications for Expert Psychological Testimony"
(1985) 69 Minn L Rev 495; D McCord, "Syndromes Profiles and Other Mental Exotica: A New
Approach to the Admissibility of Nontraditional Psychological Evidence in Criminal Cases" (1987) 66
Oregon L Review 19; D McCord, "The Admissibility of Expert Testimony
Regarding Rape Trauma Syndrome in Rape Prosecutions" (1985) 26 Bost Coll L Rev 1143.
44 People v Lukity, 596 NW 2d 607 (Mich 1999); State v McCoy, 400 NW 2d 807 (Minn App 1987).
45 People v Beckley, 434 Mich 691, 456 NW 2d 391 (1990); In re Brimer, 191 Mich App 401, 478 NW 2d 689
(1991). The rule applies to child protective proceedings as well as to criminal prosecution.
46 See Frye v United States, 293 Fed 1013 (D C Cir 1923).
47 See Ibn-Tamas v United States, 407 A 2d 626 (DC 1979); Commonwealth v Craig, 783 SW 2d 387 Ky
(1990). For discussion of the "battered woman syndrome," see L Walker, The Battered Woman
Syndrome, Springer, New York, 1984. The prominent Australian barrister Ian Freckelton argues
against the role of syndrome evidence in the legal system and questions whether "battered woman
syndrome" and "rape trauma syndrome" merit the status that they have been accorded by some
courts; I Freckelton, "Contemporary Comment; When Plight Makes Right - The Forensic Abuse
Syndrome" (1994) 18 Criminal Law Journal 29. See also AL Hyams, "Expert Psychiatric Evidence in
Sexual Misconduct Cases Before State Medical Boards" (1992) 17 Am J Law & Medicine 171.
48 RC Summit, "The Child Sexual Abuse Accommodation Syndrome" (1983) 7 Child Abuse & Neglect 177;
see SJ Ceci & H Hembrooke (eds), Expert Witnesses in Child Abuse Cases, Washington, DC,
American Psychological Association, 1998; see also TG Gutheil & PK Sutherland, "Forensic
Assessment, Witness Credibility and the Search for Truth through Expert Testimony in the
Courtroom" (1999) 27 J Psychiatry & Law 289.
49 Federal Rules of Evidence, Rule 803 (2).
50 681 P 2d at 298,
51 State v Petrich, 101 Wash 2d 566, 683 P 2d 173 (1984).
52 State of Montana v Howery, 204 Mont 417, 664 P 2d 1287 (1983).
53 711 S W 2d 639 (Tex Cr App 1986).
54 For example, the most common childhood diagnosis - attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder -
describes behaviour without in any way explaining its origin.
55 In United States v Charley, 176 F 3d 1265 at 1281 (10th Cir 1999), the Tenth Circuit ruled that a mental
health counsellor's opinion that the child's symptoms were more consistent with symptoms of
children who have been sexually abused than with the symptoms of children who witness physical
abuse of their mother was erroneously admitted. The court made its decision, citing Kumho Tire Co v
Carmichael, 119 S Ct 1167 (1999), because no sufficient foundation was laid for this kind of expert's
analysis, and no reliability inquiry was undertaken.
56 In State v Hall, 330 NC 808, 412 SE 2d 883 (1992), evidence that a victim's symptoms are consistent with
those of the typical sexual or physical abuse victim was held admissible, but only to aid the jury in
assessing the complainant's credibility.