19 Statistical Proof of Causation
ERIC MAGNUSSON*
Humans, when watched closely, display their individuality by behaving
differently even when the circumstances are exactly the same. One of these
behaviours is violent disagreement. The phenomenon is too common to surprise
us. We rationalise it by supposing that the natures and nurtures through which
the data are filtered can be responsible for contradictory perceptions from
identical inputs.
An even stranger behaviour is unquestioning agreement. While most of the
world was hunting and gathering, the Greeks were expounding the 256 variations
of this curiously powerful format: "If this, then that; But this is true, therefore
that is also true". Humans declare the argument to be "the Proof of that" and
subscribe the mystic letters QED. An early user, Euclid, put a set of such
arguments into five books, never imagining that his collected theorems would
continue as the prescribed texts in the subject for over two thousand years. The
behaviour must run very deep.
The strength of the formula and its attendant labels like proof and preuve (Fr)
and demonstratio (L) rises from the simple fact that the final clause in the
argument cannot be denied without contradicting the earlier ones. A
contradiction is something the species strenuously avoids making. "Cognitive
dissonance" research surprised us by showing that we protect ourselves from self-
contradiction even to the point of disregarding things previously accepted as fact.
A world without contradictions comes at the price of damage to its factual base,
but it is the world we all prefer.
The word "proof" is strongest when it describes sentences which conform to a
logic in which every assertion is either completely true or completely false. Little
of the real world fits this requirement, which is why the word can rarely be truly
used. We could decide to simplify the world by arbitrarily making true and false
the only truth-values allowed, but the world will not comply – the evidence on
which to assign these qualities is always only partly certain. Most newspaper
reports and almost all of what comes to court require multi-valued logic and are,
therefore, ill suited to adjudication by formula. But they are no insuperable
problem to courts run by people, creatures constructed to reason with assertions
that may be partly true and partly false, or partly known and partly unknown. In
such a world probability rules and statistics is its indispensable partner.
That human brains can do statistics is easily demonstrated. By eye, humans
can judge the straightness of a line drawn on paper with more precision than the
human eye is capable of. The eye is an instrument which uses tiny cells to detect
light and this limits the perceived straightness of a dark line on white paper to
the straightness of the not-very-straight lines of cells on which the light and dark
images happen to fall. But the eye scans along the line and the brain apparently
calculates what the line of cells would be if the random displacements of cells
from linearity were replaced by their average. This statistical approach makes the
eye capable of detecting deviations from straightness more than ten times smaller
than the minimum separation of cells in the retina.
Making conscious decisions about masses of data is also natural for the brain.
The brain is a device for making connections between neurons, while the mind
makes meaning. Somehow the former is the mechanism for the latter. Brains
routinely make circuits by the million to store information, preparing us for
decisions made later by "weighing up" the effect of the currents flowing through
circuits in many different places. In other words, we do "statistics" at this level
too.
Although human thinking is statistical, talking about statistical thinking is not.
The results of the thinking are evaluated subconsciously and any attempt to
inspect the steps taken by the brain is likely to confuse the inspector. The ease
with which human beings become confused about statistics is not only raw
material for humour, it is a reality to be recognised when statistical science enters
a court of law. All the wisdom and all the effort behind statistical evidence is
worth nothing if the tribunal cannot comprehend it or, worse still,
miscomprehends it. Likewise, statistical analysis of jury decisions is meaningless
unless there is independent assessment of the jurors' comprehension of the issues
they were deciding. The question of comprehension of statistical statements is a
serious one and it will be a thread which runs through the whole of this chapter.
In spite of all of this, modern cognitive science is successfully uncovering at least
some of the mechanisms that underlie the human thinking process and the results
throw light on how people behave when making decisions based on information
only partly true or only partly known.
The Profession and Practice of Statistics
Statistical methods allow scientists and engineers to apply common sense to data
that, like data of any other kind, are inexact.1 The errors, which may be random
or systematic, cannot be eliminated from measurements and the common sense
consists in recognising them, estimating their magnitude, and trying to discover
where they come from. When soft data are involved statistical methods are
indispensable. Without some way to determine what is constant and what is
variable, data obtained from surveys, interviews, human memory and the like
would be worthless. This is why social scientists usually know more about
statistics than physical scientists.
In this world, the data that come into the adversarial court are soft, error-prone
and almost entirely untestable. In addition, the data are introduced through a set
of individual and unrepeatable contributions – one man prosecutes, one defends,
one expert presents the complex evidence, and one judge presides and rules on
issues of law. The jury, when it is present, is the single injection of error
reduction into the whole process but, again, the outcome of jury deliberation is
vulnerable to a single strong-minded individual. However, even in the jury room,
improvement will probably not come until someone "does the statistics".
Statistical reasoning, on the other hand, enters the courtroom often and its
impact continues to grow. It is felt in two ways – by the explicit presentation of
statistical argument and, more broadly, by taking advantage of the conceptual
approach inherent in statistical reasoning. Sir Richard Eggleston's manual is still a
rich source of this advantage.2 As mentioned below, in a statistical setting
hypothesis testing is accomplished not by confirming the alternative hypothesis
but by rejecting the null hypothesis. The alternative hypothesis can be considered
only after it has been demonstrated that the effects of the cause are not the result
of chance variation – the differences have to be statistically significant. When
events outside the laboratory are viewed through that particular prism, the view
changes and much of the easy inference of life disappears. There ought to be a
permanent place for that prism in every court.
One of the truisms of statistical reasoning that has been penetrating the
community is that scientific tests sometimes fail. From experience with medical
pathology or, maybe, by using do-it-yourself tests from pharmacists, people
become familiar with the possibility of "false negatives" and "false positives". The
failures need not be symmetrical, the incidence of "false positives" being
generally different from that of "false negatives". This recognition, which can be
very important indeed in special types of statistical reasoning, is within the grasp
of the average juror.
Professional statisticians, at first regarded suspiciously by courts, now occupy a
well recognised domain of expertise and their evidence brings with it all the
benefits and all the risks of opinion evidence in general. Their contributions as
expert witnesses are made almost exclusively in civil cases where the statistical
procedures themselves have become major issues in the action. The expert's
testimony may be called "statistical methodology evidence" to distinguish it from
the much more common "statistical evidence" in which an expert from some
other domain provides information for the court in statistical form, usually by
use of techniques which have become routine. Although published over ten years
ago, The Evolving Role of Statistical Assessments as Evidence in the Courts, edited
by Fienberg, is still an excellent introduction, combining a fairly detailed analysis
of a small number of typical cases with authoritative comment on the whole field
including criminal cases.3
Statisticians also contribute to the justice system as authorities on existing
statistical procedures as well as by developing new methods. Thus, the use of
Bayesian statistics has been widely adopted in reporting identification evidence;
scientists trained in molecular biology have learned to use the statistical methods
appropriate to the forensic science they practise. Statistics is now regarded as an
important competency for all forensic scientists but for those working with
identification evidence it is indispensable.
An important development in the science and technology sector is the general
acceptance of the need for rigorous accreditation of scientists and laboratories
that serve the community. This development came rather late to forensic sciences
but it has been wholeheartedly adopted worldwide and courts can now find out
about the performance of forensic science laboratories and even of individual
experts.4 Making judgments on professional training, experience and ongoing
competence is a skill which courts do not usually possess but it is made easier
when laboratories and staff submit themselves to the scrutiny currently required
for forensic science accreditation in Australia, New Zealand, the United Kingdom
and various other countries.5
Things Done and Not Done with Statistics
Statistical methodology evidence is often of the kind where different experts
favour different methods. In the special circumstances where the data are hard to
treat or where the results are closely balanced or where unfamiliar techniques
have been used, opinions are apt to vary from one expert to another and the
expert evidence falls into the "subjective evaluation" category.6 The court then
hears the contrary opinions of experts giving testimony at a level it cannot
ordinarily reach. There is no way for it to know which of the two experts would
represent the majority of the profession; possibly neither does. The obverse of this
is that highly qualified statisticians in court may find themselves given no more
respect than novices. As in other examples of subjective evaluation evidence, the
proper solution is by independent corroboration from as many other experts as
are necessary for the court to feel confident about the representativeness of the
result. New procedures for obtaining opinions from a larger number of
practitioners may be required.
The range of problems for which statistical methods are invoked is broad. From
the statistician's viewpoint they can be classified by the kind of parameter
(variance, regression, etc) relied on to solve the problem and the further
distinction made between descriptive statistics (data) and inferential statistics
(predictions and likelihoods).7
A legal classification is more difficult than a statistical one. Civil suit actions
relying on statistical evidence are described in many monographs and collections
of which the multi-author volume by DeGroot, Fienberg and Kadane is a good
example.8 No two classify their subject in the same way.
At the head of the list must stand actions, including class actions, charging
race and gender discrimination the area of litigation claimed to have generated
the greatest demand for witnesses with expertise in statistics in recent years.9 The
first two of five case studies in the committee report edited by Fienberg are in
this category and the analysis is of high quality.10 One feature of the influential
Vuyanich v Republic National Bank case11 is selected for mention here. The judge
expressed his suspicion that the statistical models presented to him by the two
sides were too good; he was dubious about the "precision-like mesh of numbers"
in both. That comment was matched by comment from expert statisticians to the
effect that the statistical assessments were not really good enough to have taken
so much of the judge's time and, particularly, that statistical quality control had
not been applied to the evidence. This reinforces the complaint at the beginning
of this section and underlines the need for courts to find ways to tell the
difference between good and bad expert evidence. The court cannot presume that
experts found by litigants will have come from the top of the profession.
The word "Medicine" in the title of this volume requires recognition in this
chapter even if it is brief. Probabilistic statements feature strongly in court
proceedings involving medicine; one reason being that humans beings are
animals with highly developed control systems fitted with "manual override"
allowing their psychology to interfere with their physiology. Consequently, they
are rarely used as subjects for discovering the laws of nature in the animal
kingdom and even less for higher level theories about life; fruit flies and bacteria
are much more attractive subjects. The laws of human injury and disease are
discovered by epidemiologists working at the observation and generalisation
levels of scientific enquiry. Although their discoveries gain value from their work
with human subjects, at neither level can genuine cause and effect relationships
be established.
Epidemiologists may well discover relationships between variables but they
cannot be sure which is the cause and which the effect. Ultimately the question is
answered when other discoveries are made and an etiology is accepted.
Meanwhile, the public health decisions and lawsuits are too impatient to wait.12
Negative epidemiological evidence puts an even bigger burden on the fact-
finder's shoulders because the negative evidence cannot disprove the null
hypothesis. Fienberg believes that support for epidemiology in this particular
negative role is, nonetheless, growing.13 Well-constructed studies with sufficient
statistical power14 should be taken seriously if they fail to find the health
problems posited in the alternative hypothesis. The weaknesses of
epidemiological studies listed are those of "lurking variables or synergisms
between variables", studies too small to find low level effects, studies too short to
find effects with long latencies, and problems with the analysis of studies some of
which may be retrospective and some prospective.
Statistical errors are very likely to be made in court by intelligent and careful
lawyers, judges, expert witnesses and jurors for the simple reason that statistics is
hard. Even if they are not made publicly, people are still prone to make them in
their heads. A list would have to include the following:
Confusing different ways of expressing probabilities. "A chance of one in
three" is different from "Odds of one to three". The latter is "a chance of
one in four".
Overlooking the need to quote the "variance" as well as the "central
tendency" of a set of data.15
Failing to appreciate the impact of sampling error. Whenever a small
sample is used to estimate the characteristics of the whole, the probability
of error must be stated.
Over-interpretation of trends, a disease found commonly in futurologists.
But errors in probabilistic or statistical reasoning are not all elementary. There
are many ways to classify them, one of which is to distinguish between
methodological errors and errors of interpretation or application. Here is a
judicial error which straddles the two. Although not dealing in numerical values,
the judge is still dealing with probabilities when summing up with the remark
"the evidence is like a rope, unavoidably rather frayed and therefore no stronger
than its weakest part. You must decide if it is strong enough to hold the weight of
a conviction" or she may say "the evidence shines tiny rays of light on the crime
scene and one by one they illuminate it better. You must decide if they make it
bright enough for you to see the perpetrator!"16 Even though some jurors may not
see them as anything more than encouragement to think carefully, the two
figures of speech imply particular relationships between the items of evidence.
The latter comment, borrowed by an Australian judge from Lord Chancellor
Cairns in England, implies that the prosecution case becomes stronger the more
numerous the items of evidence brought to bear; in other words, that the overall
weight of the evidence is an additive function of the individual items. This is true
only of items that are independent which was not so in the case in question.
Consider a case in which successive witnesses report seeing the intruder to have
hairy arms, hairy legs, hairy neck and hairy chest. The case that the hairy suspect
must therefore be guilty is not strengthened by the apparent corroboration;
characteristics found very commonly together are not independent.17
A different kind of error is the heresy of plausible dogma. As statistical
information enters our lives, the dogmas come with it. One such is the idea that
data which fall outside 95 per cent confidence limits are unworthy of scientific
notice. If the idea did no more damage than to eliminate a few bright ideas from
publication in scientific journals, it may not matter. However, the idea has been
imported into other realms and courts are told that data slightly more deviant
than the 95 per cent confidence level variety are unacceptable for human
consumption of any kind. Usually they are not told, the data being ejected before
ever reaching court.
The background is as follows. Data which fluctuate unaccountably, like those
for river heights or crime, will usually contain some entries which are extreme.
Early in the last century statistical methods were developed to calculate the
characteristics of extreme data and determine how frequently extreme events
could be expected. Fostered by the great statistician Fisher, the idea grew that a
boundary on a chart could help distinguish ordinary chance variation from what
was exceptional. The value of the idea came from being able to put the boundary
anywhere the statistician thought was appropriate; it was not determined by the
mathematics. The result of Fisher's choice, adopted widely because of his
influence, is that the 95 per cent boundary has become the obligatory standard
for "statistical significance", results falling outside it being regarded as unsuitable
for scientific use. Thus data to test a scientific hypothesis that high vitamin intake
raises the birth weight of rats will be rejected as "not statistically significant"
unless the average birth weight is larger than the 95 per cent limit. Birth weights
inside the boundary are, by this usage, within the normal range.
Because the limits are applied so widely, statisticians are apt to use 95 per cent
confidence limits in court proceedings as the criterion for accepting data, but this
is unwarranted. Hall and Selinger18 and others19 have argued strongly that the
decision about the significance criterion is a matter for the court, not for the
statistician. Just as it is the jury's job to decide the weight of the evidence
necessary for it to be "beyond reasonable doubt", so also is it the prerogative of
the jury to decide the significance limits for accepting evidence.
Confidence limits, aside from their function as discriminators between normal
and abnormal fluctuations in something being examined, may be used directly.
Several cases of this are mentioned in DeGroot, Fienberg and Kadane.20 One such
use is to inform the court of the uncertainty in a statistical result that arises from
the fact that it is an estimate based on information from a sample rather than the
whole population.
Statistical procedures may sometimes shrink a problem without solving it.
Blood alcohol legislation in many jurisdictions refers to devices which measure
the alcohol concentration in breath but deliver the result as if it were the alcohol
concentration in blood. The conversion is made by use of a factor obtained from
measurements of alcohol concentrations in the breath and blood of the same
individual, repeating the process on a sample of reasonable size and determining
the average. Because of the variance in the distribution of alcohol between a
person's blood and the breath, some drivers are disadvantaged by the use of an
average. In other words, it takes a higher than average blood alcohol
concentration to put some people above the legislated limit for breath and a
lower than average level for others. The latter are disadvantaged by the average,
the former sometimes protected from the prosecution they would suffer if the
blood alcohol concentration were measured directly. One way to handle this
problem is for the police to take the enlightened approach of prosecuting only
when the breath alcohol result exceeds the legislated limit by a small amount, say
one or two standard deviations.
Later in this chapter the need to protect defendants from errors in statistical
calculations used in criminal prosecutions is emphasised. Safeguards against error
are also necessary in civil proceedings, as some examples indicate. When the
steps involved in a statistical procedure are planned we can install a safeguard at
each one: (a) choosing the procedure, (b) selecting the sample, (c) calculating the
results.
A common procedure in medicine is the controlled clinical trial and, given the
financial implications of treatment costs, it is not surprising that trial results
should sometimes become evidence in courts. To avoid the placebo effect, a
common requirement is that the trial be "blind", subjects being unaware whether
they are members of the treatment or the control groups. For various reasons,
participants often become aware of the group to which they were assigned and
the trial is less blind than was planned. One possible reason is the desire of
promoters of, say, pharmaceuticals, to see patients with poor prospects of
recovery placed in the control group. A recent examination of the rigour of
experimenters in allocating participants to the two groups has shown that very
large differences in results occur between "blind" and "not so blind" trials. Odds
ratios expressing the effectiveness of the treatment were 30 per cent to 40 per cent
larger when subjects were able to discover their group.21
This section closes with a reference to problems that statistical reasoning
cannot solve. Unfortunately, public beliefs that grow from survey data (toxins in
the environment or the effects of war service on veterans) that lead ultimately to
class actions may bear little relation to the valid conclusions to be drawn from
the statistics. Special problems arise when the number of people affected is very
small (like cancer in children raised near power lines) or tests not completely
reliable. Because many people are unwilling to tolerate risk of any kind, they
respond to revelations about risks by demanding that the risk be removed
completely. Changing their attitude is hard because the very small (or very large)
numbers quoted in the epidemiological reports are so unfamiliar and so easy to
exploit.
What Reasoning Is
Reasoning can be a process of moving through a chain of arguments from
premises to a conclusion, each step concluding one argument as it provides entry
to the next. Human beings can do this on paper or in their heads. The intuitive
method allows great speed with little or no conscious oversight of the individual
steps. The disadvantage of the speed is that it is accomplished by the use of hard-
wired short-cut methods the results of which sometimes conflict with the same
person's decision when it is made deliberately. Cognitive scientists term the short
cut methods "heuristics" and "biases"22 and their work is having an effect on how
people think about the rules and methods and results of legal proceedings.
For present purposes the most important conclusion of cognitive studies is the
finding that human beings, irrespective of training, are "probability blind".
Although probabilistic information is being processed and acted on almost all the
time, the intuitive responses to it are flawed. People trained in statistics and
probability are vulnerable to the same errors as naive subjects and when trying to
solve certain types of problems can produce answers that are right only by
consciously avoiding the answers that seem right.
Humans appear to cope with the complexity of probabilistic information by
simplifying it. Experiments show that if it cannot be simplified, they will
discriminate between risks only if the differences are very large. Also, their
overall view of risk is biased, so that they habitually take risks to avoid loss but
avoid risks to preserve their gains. They try to deal with problems in the way
they are presented, avoiding the difficult but sometimes necessary task of "re-
framing". Thus positive statements are favoured over the equivalent negatively-
framed ones, even though only the latter provide the clue to the right response.
They innately break the rules of probability, being quite capable of judging the
simultaneous occurrence of two events to be more probable than the same events
would be if they occurred separately. Such responses to information usually occur
because of the "reasonableness" the subject feels for the linked events or to the
plausibility of the overall narrative. This latter feature, the fitting of events into a
not-unlikely story, is a powerful influence on the way that the events themselves
are judged. The story may be subjective, in the mind of a single person, or it may
be suggested to all to manipulate opinion, when it can be very powerful. This
type of influence is important in courtroom decision-making and has attracted a
considerable amount of recent comment.23
In court, these patterns of reasoning can seriously disrupt the result that might
reasonably be expected. A particular example is the inability of many people to
deal with probabilities below (or above) a certain level. One author suggests that
most people will be unable to distinguish between a 99 per cent chance of
infection, wealth, injury, etc and a 99.9 per cent chance,24 a blindness that would
seriously interfere with the intended use by jurors of the statistical information
given with DNA profiling evidence. Of course, the difficulty is greatly reduced
when the statements are put so that the comparison is of a 1 per cent chance and
a 0.1 per cent chance. Even so, the same scholar suggests that any probability
intuition made by an untrained person has a more than 50 per cent likelihood of
being wrong.
Eggleston some time ago commented on the earlier findings of cognitive
science,25 linking them to the alternatives described by Cohen as "Pascalian" and
"Baconian" probabilities. Cohen,26 working from what he thought was actually
happening In courtrooms, argued for the intuitive handling (Baconian) of
probabilistic material even though it was not necessarily consistent with standard
(Pascalian) probability laws. However, the "inference on inference" problem
which Cohen used as rationale for disregarding classical probability laws is
readily handled by using Bayes theorem.27 Pending more information about
human reasoning under courtroom conditions and under the challenge of
statistical information, it would be wise to persist with the standard framework
but to work much harder to ensure that the evidence is comprehensible.
The Meaning of Proof
The word "proof" in the title of this chapter was not contributed by its author.
"Proof" is a strong word and keeps its place in the legal corner of his
consciousness only by a force fit. It is also a seductive word to which we are all
vulnerable when we suspect that our arguments may not prevail on their merits
alone. Scientists reserve a strong word for strong logical deductions (things you
cannot deny without contradicting yourself) because they have learned that most
deductions are not strong or logical; they want to be able to flag the difference.
If any justifications for this pedantry were needed, the two words "statistical"
and "court" provide it. "Proofs" that are "statistical" must be of the kind where the
proposition is believed to be true but not known to be true. The level of belief can
be anywhere between the very high and the very low. So, a word is needed for
the one fixed point in the scale, certainty, from which all the other points can be
located. Secondly, in court, even though the strongest kind of association
evidence can never incriminate a person absolutely, it can still exonerate a person
absolutely. So, again, a word that only ever means "proved absolutely" would be
valuable for preventing the confidence about the one kind of result from
contaminating the caution always to be attached to the other.
In spite of all the ink to the contrary, science and the law walk paths that run
very close together. Both are searching for truth even though courts have to do it
speedily and be content with a qualified result. Science has more leisure but also
has to accept that its conclusions are true only "as far as they have been tested".
Illusions of certainty often arise, but that happens because the qualified nature of
the pronouncements has been swamped by the emotion of the verdict.
In deciding how to judge a scientist's claim to have verified an hypothesis,
other scientists put the stress on the severity of the tests that the hypothesis has
survived. They want to know how well and how comprehensively the tests
equipped the scientist to detect false explanations. Karl Popper championed this
approach, enshrining the "refutability" of an hypothesis, not its "confirmability",
as the key to scientific progress.
The concept of "refutability" provides a good lead for courts to follow. It can be
argued that this should be overt. A jury explicitly instructed to protect the person
wrongly accused should be all the more ready to convict when each step of the
trial process has seen the safeguards applied. The prosecution witnesses will be
all the more believable when they have explained why they "were unable to find
a test that excluded" the suspect before reporting evidence that incriminated
them. A judge who is scrupulous in applying the presumption of innocence rule
will satisfy jurors that the trial was fair; they are then freed to bring down a
verdict without anxiety about the possible conviction of a person who is not
guilty. They do not do so without risk, but they eliminate the anxiety by
minimising the risk.
The analogies run even further. Statistical evidence is customarily tested by
using the rejection of the null hypothesis as the criterion for considering of the
alternative hypothesis – a neat restatement of the presumption of innocence rule.
Identification cannot be considered until the court is forced to reject the
presumption that the evidence lies within the range of random occurrences.
Jurors’ Proof
Nobody knows what juries think proof is. The interplay between knowledge
already possessed and knowledge received in the court and the way information
is processed en route to a verdict are mysteries. Authorities now seem more ready
to authorise research into jury behaviour but, in the meantime, mock jury
research sheds some light on the subject. Although quite inadequate in
simulating what the jury receives in particular cases, the method is most useful
for observing subjects' comprehension levels, biases and attitudes to issues taken
one at a time. It can also report on groups large enough to be representative of
the community as a whole, it can relate their responses to education levels and
demographic factors. It can also vary parameters such as the strength of the
evidence and allow investigators to give quantitative estimates of how
community members would respond to issues when serving in a jury.
Although not really numerous or comprehensive, mock jury studies have
contributed to our understanding of the way in which people deal with
probabilities when making decisions. An important early result was the finding
that subjects adjust the criminal court standard of proof to the severity of the
sentence likely to be delivered. Simon and Mahan found a way of getting their
subjects to quantitate the probability of guilt and found that jurors required 0.86
for murder compared with only 0.74 for larceny.28 Judges, also tested, made the
same adjustment, although the standards they required were higher (0.92 down to
0.87). At the standard required for civil suit decisions the numbers would be
much lower; it would be interesting to know how much difference there is
between jurors' and judges' quantitative assessments and the 50 per cent figure
often assumed in legal argument about causation and liability.29 There are,
however, other standards of proof. An example from the United States follows
but the argument is probably used very widely, even if it unlegislated. In
enforcing the environmental regulatory standard which led to the disappearance
of "leaded" petrol from the market, the court said:
When a statute is precautionary in nature, the evidence difficult to come by, or uncertain, or conflicting
because it is on the frontiers of scientific knowledge, the regulations designed to protect the public
health, and the decision that of an expert administrator, we will not demand rigorous step-by-step proof
of cause and effect... The Administrator may apply his expertise to draw inferences from suspected, but
not completely substantiated, relationships between facts, from trends among facts, from theoretical
projections from imperfect data, from probative preliminary data not yet certifiable as "fact", and the
like.30
With this in mind, the fascinating discussion in Fienberg31 and its set of
relativities of proof may be extended to:
1 > Pcrim > Pother > Pcivil > 0.5 > Pprot > 0 where pcrim and pcivil are the customary
criminal and civil standards of proof, pother the intermediate standard used in
deportation proceedings in the United States ("clear, unequivocal, and convincing
evidence") and pprot the "public protection" standard referred to in the previous
paragraph.
Two early reviews32 of mock jury research reassure those who fear that
statistical evidence might overwhelm jurors and tip the scale far too strongly in
favour of the prosecution. In the writer's research,33 almost a third of the 558
respondents thought that the risk of convicting an innocent person had to be zero
and consequently declined to label the accused as guilty even though the
identification evidence was quite strong.34 The proof, for them, had to be
absolute. Among the 77 respondents who were university trained, the same
fraction insisted on this standard. As pointed out in other reports, these views
would be unlikely to prevail in actual jury deliberations, where a unanimous
verdict is required and where other jurors might be persuasive. Overall, the
willingness to convict was firmly tied to the strength of the identification
evidence. Only 8 per cent would convict when the risk was high (20 per cent
random match probability), a figure which rose to 69 per cent when the whole
group was asked whether they would convict when the random match
probability was only 0.5 per cent.
It is evident that jurors become alarmed when the evidence is not quite strong
enough for them to be sure beyond reasonable doubt. In the writer's research,
respondents were, on the average, unwilling to convict when the odds associated
with inclusion were lower than about 10:1. But jurors also become alarmed when
the odds are "too large". Odds of the order of 25 billion:1 are beyond common
imagination but are frequently quoted in connection with DNA profiling.35 The
reason sometimes given for this reaction is "that such large odds must be
impossible because the number 25 billion is larger than the population of the
world". The answer is that odds ratios are calculated according to the potential
number of persons which the test is capable of distinguishing. Whether or not
that number is greater than the population of the United Kingdom, Australia or
the world is irrelevant. In the case of the DNA profiling test, the discriminating
power is obtained as the product of several factors (one for each "locus") and each
of these can be calculated with suitable accuracy from as few as one hundred
tissue samples. Increasing the size of the database increases the precision of the
result but not its magnitude, so databases of millions of people are not required.
The number of jurors across the world who hear statistical evidence given in
connection with DNA profiles is now very large. It is curious how willing
appellate courts are to comment on their comprehension of that evidence and
their ability to assess it, when neither has ever been measured.
Statistics and DNA Profile Evidence36
In its commonest manifestation,37 DNA evidence is obtained by using chemical
"probes" to recognise fragments of DNA in the chromosomes in the nuclei of
cells. The evidence, called the profile, consists of a list of fragment sizes.38 Ten
probes are used, one of the current commercial implementations of the
technology,39 to produce a list of the sizes of twenty fragments. The greater the
number of probes, the larger and more peculiar the list and the smaller the
probability that the profile of another person, selected by chance, should be
similar enough to produce a match. With likelihood ratios of many billions to
one, the method now provides identification evidence as powerful as was
produced with that first achievement of forensic science, fingerprinting.
Nevertheless, DNA profiling has not been given the same courtroom status,
namely, that of unquestioned individualisation; the statistical evidence is almost
always reported in detail.
Most DNA profilers now carry out their statistical calculations on a Bayes'
Law framework irrespective of whether they will be allowed to use the name of
the 18th century clergyman. The number of trials over which his spectre hovered
during the last decade of the twentieth century is the reason he is so well known.
However, the Bayesian "subjective" approach was introduced to forensic science
well before the advent of DNA profiling after years of extensive discussion in
relation to other kinds of evidence.40 One of its chief virtues is the simple appeal
of the argument that the "prior odds" of guilt (deemed to be determined by the
court before the DNA evidence is heard) should be increased by a factor to yield
the "posterior odds".
The older "frequentist" or "objective" method for presenting identification
evidence statistics asks for DNA profiles to be compared and a declaration made
about whether they match or not; only then can the random match probability be
calculated. It is a "two-stage approach". In practice, declaring a "match" becomes
a problem because the behaviour of the DNA fragments during the measurement
process is not always uniform. Even though profiles from the same source will
have easily recognisable patterns, the actual fragment sizes measured in the
laboratory can vary. If too high a significance level is set for a match, then
profiles that came from the same source may fail to meet the match criterion and
important evidence may have to be discarded. On the other hand, if the
significance level is low, it becomes too easy for other fragments of slightly
different sizes to qualify so a match provides much weaker evidence.
By contrast, the Bayesian method asks questions about the DNA profiles
obtained from the crime scene sample and the reference sample from the suspect
and compares them. The questions are:
What are the odds that these evidence profiles would be found for
samples from the same person?
What are the odds that they would be found for samples taken from
different persons?
The ratio of these two odds values is called the "likelihood ratio". Bayesian
reasoning cuts through the knot of unavoidable variation in laboratory results
and tells us how much stronger our suspicions ought to be now that we have
compared these two profiles and allowed for the two possible hypotheses (same
person or different persons). Moreover, without inconsistency, it allows the court
to deal explicitly with alibi evidence. If the suspect was in Morocco when the
crime was committed in Melbourne, then the posterior odds are zero-to-one
because the prior odds are zero-to-one. No matter how large the likelihood ratio,
prior odds of zero-to-one must yield posterior odds of zero-to-one.
Mention of an alibi immediately raises the issue of what Thompson and
Schumann call the "prosecutor's fallacy"41 but which is less colourfully named the
fallacy of the "transposed conditional". Consider a profile with the rather small
random match probability of one in a million. Applying Bayes' Law in the usual
situation allows us to conclude that after the evidence of the profile becomes
known the odds of guilt are increased by a factor of a million. The fallacy is to
conclude, without any knowledge of the prior odds, that the odds of guilt are a
million to one. The "defense attorney's fallacy" is to conclude that, since the
profile in question was very uncommon, so the odds of guilt must be very low.
The latter error is harder to sustain than the prosecutor's fallacy which is very
alluring.
The sum of all this is that by about 1995 one of the most valuable applications
of science to the investigation of crime had become established across the world
and, in parallel, the assumptions used for calculations of match probability had
been validated by an unprecedented amount of research 42 and, again, frequentist
statistical presentation of the results had been clearly shown to be inferior to the
Bayesian approach. Mysteriously, judges in trial courts and appeals courts
continued to accept the first development but many acted as if the latter two had
never occurred. They forget, apparently, that Bayes' Law has been used for
decades in disputed paternity cases though, of course, those decisions are not
usually made by a jury.
The 1997 and 1998 judgments of the English Court of Appeal in Doheny and
Adams43 and Adams (Denis)44 contain inconsistencies which should have been
eliminated years earlier. The judgments have been analysed by many
commentators.
The discussion of Doheny and Adams by Evett et al45 is outstanding. A very
important part of it is their rebuttal of the appellate court's view of the goal of
DNA profiling. The judges said "... the stage may be reached where a match will
be so comprehensive that it will be possible to construct a DNA profile that is
unique and which proves the guilt of the defendant without any other evidence."
Not so, say Evett et al, the advantage of smaller and yet smaller random match
probabilities is in solving special problems; complete individualisation status is
not a practical goal for DNA profiling and only remains for fingerprint evidence
because its scientific basis was never sought.
Decisions in higher courts have consequences which may persist for a long
time. Kaye46 has given an account of the Arizona Supreme Court's decision in
State v Bible47 in which the admissibility of the prosecution's DNA evidence was
confirmed but the random match probability information excluded. The court
believed, from news accounts and cases in other jurisdictions, that there was "a
lack of general acceptance of Cellmark's statistical probability calculations in the
relevant scientific community of population geneticists" even though it approved
the methods employed by Cellmark48 to declare a match. In a series of decisions,
the Supreme Court reinforced its Bible decision by repeatedly disallowing
quantitative probability evidence while seeing no objection in evidence simply
stating that "it is most likely that these two samples came from the same source".
Allowing identification evidence to be heard without telling the jury about the
risk that the match may not be perfect is hard to justify but the decision is not
unique. The idea was dismissed by Hampel J in the Victorian case of R v Lucas49
with the words "I think that there is in this case the danger that consistency could
assume the colour of identity, or at least of probability".
The 1996 trial in New South Wales of the serial "back-packer murderer"
contained two items of statistical interest.50 Hunt CJ criticised the term "genetic
fingerprinting" as being misleading because DNA evidence does not provide
individualisation and the prosecution provided the court with the confidence
limits for the random match probability, as deduced from the size of the database.
For interest, the expert quoted "one in 188,000" as the middle of the range of
probabilities extending from "one in 54,000" to "one in 220,000". The words
"coincidence figure" used were unusual but they have the merit of being fairly
transparent for jurors who are now faced not by one probability, but by three.
However, officers of the New South Wales Forensic Science Service report that it
is current practice in the state to meet the requirements of the ruling about
confidence limits51 by mentioning one figure only, the most conservative one.
An especially lengthy challenge to the admissibility of DNA profile evidence
was launched by the defence in R v Karger in the Supreme Court of South
Australia in 2001.52 Mullighan J conducted a voire dire lasting for 14 weeks; his
reasons for admitting the evidence occupied 176 pages. Although most of the time
was occupied with challenges to the proprietary "Profiler Plus" methodology the
statistical evidence was also impugned. The defence's concern was the validity of
the databases and the use of a "likelihood ratio" to represent the significance of
the alleged profile match. This was an important opportunity for the Australian
bench to rule on identification evidence in which the sophistication of the
technology is matched by the way it is reported to the court.
The judge's discussion of the technology dominated his report; only about 5
per cent dealt with the statistical matters. The challenges to the validity of the
databases charged inadequate representation of racial/ethnic population sub-
groups, the possibility of inter-allele dependence and the inclusion of inapplicable
values of the parameter representing the degree of relationship of persons
represented in the database. The challenges were disallowed. The use of
calculations widely accepted by the profession, the conservative approach of the
population geneticist53 and the Forensic Science Service's policy of reporting a
random match probability of one in a billion [the calculated value was one in 90.6
billion, itself the more conservative upper confidence limit] satisfied the judge
that the evidence should not be disallowed on grounds of supposed inadequacy of
the databases.
The issue of the likelihood ratio was then raised. The defence objections to the
way the prosecution planned to report the strength of the evidence were "The use
of Bayes' Theorem by the jury is not permitted: the jury cannot make any
mathematical estimate of the prior odds" and, consequently, since the likelihood
ratio "has no other relevant use" it should be inadmissible. In considering the
likelihood ratio challenge the judge referred to the recent United Kingdom
appellate decision in R v Adams,54 reiterated in R v Doheney and Adams55
quoting part of the R v Adams judgment, to show how the Court of Criminal
Appeal saw Bayes' Law. The Court viewed as "an attempt to determine guilt or
innocence on the basis of a mathematical formula ... [which] is simply
inappropriate to the jury's task." The unfortunate thing is that what was
inappropriate in R v Adams was not Bayes' Law but the task it was given.56 The
judge rejected the challenge thereby allowing likelihood ratios to be reported but,
by default, Bayesian reasoning was excluded. It is ironic that a mathematical (ie
correct and logical) way for probabilities to be combined is rejected because it is
mathematical (ie inappropriate).
With the DNA profile evidence ruled admissible the trial began and the
likelihood ratio was reported with the laboratory's standard form of words: "The
DNA profile obtained from the sample stains are more than one billion times
more likely to match the DNA profile of Mr Karger if he left the stains rather
than an unknown, unrelated male". The accused was convicted.
As argued earlier, the very nature of Bayesian reasoning allows it to fit
naturally into a narrative of the conceptual steps through the argument put by
the prosecution, or an alternative narrative offered by the defence. In cases where
scientific-cum-statistical evidence is vital to the case the idea of making the story
explicit has two merits. It helps the court manage what would otherwise be
confusing detail57 and it provides the basis for an examination by the court of the
validity and reliability issues related to the evidence which need to be settled
before the ultimate issue is decided. To do it systematically, some kind of graphic
aid58 would be helpful when jurors are faced with complex and unfamiliar
scientific or statistical evidence – displaying the conceptual steps helps the court
emphasise the safeguards required at each step before it is safe to make the final
decision. For our current purpose we should ignore earlier steps relating to
laboratory processes59 and concentrate on the ones relating to the statistical steps.
They are, (a) the choice of the overall statistical procedure, (b) the kinds of
alternative hypothesis to be considered, (c) the ethnicity of the database, (d) the
representativeness of the database, (e) the relatedness of the individuals in it, (f)
the calculation of the statistic and (g) how it will be reported. In the great
majority of cases the safeguards are easily put but there are times when the issues
are more complex, say when closely related persons are among the suspects, or
when some of the suspects are missing.60 It then becomes especially important for
the court to be sure that each step was properly taken whether or not the
evidence is challenged. As statisticians point out, statistical evidence is not fixed
by the characteristics of the profile; it also depends on the kind of defence
mounted by the defendant.
The Limits of Comprehension
A juror in a criminal trial is required to convert a mass of raw data into a score of
exactly guilty or not guilty. The actual mental process is rather like someone
finding one of two exits from a maze or, as modern studies of the brain suggest,
like a huge crowd simultaneously rushing along myriads of separate and
completely unplanned paths through the maze. Which exit they will ultimately
find is impossible to know as thousands of seemingly haphazard choices are
made at countless junctions. But the tiny benefits of previous choices gradually
begin to tell and finally the crowd converges on just one of the two exits. The
point is that the process is all the more unpredictable, the more disparate the
different kinds of decision required to produce the final result. Worst of all, if the
choices have to be made on statistical data, with probabilities rather than just
Yes/No decisions required for computing the overall result, the computation
might become too hard to make. In such circumstances, jurors do not make no
decision, they make the decision on such other grounds as they think fit.
In the author's Canberra jury project, the design of the experiment permitted a
certain amount of exposure of the reasoning which respondents used to make
their decisions about guilt. One set of results is recounted here. In the audio tape
the judge's summing up of the evidence offered minimal comment, the judge
purporting to read the scientific expert's conclusions from his report about
finding a match and then using blood group data from a database to estimate "the
odds that a person drawn by chance from the Australian population would
produce the same results from the seven blood group tests as found for the crime
scene sample". In the questionnaire, however, a Bayesian framework was used to
lead respondents through a set of questions designed to measure comprehension.
The results indicated that however it was that "jurors" determined the question of
guilt, it was not supported by any high level of understanding of the concepts
involved.
When considering evidence indicating odds of 200-to-one against finding the
same blood results by chance, 69 per cent of respondents gave a guilty verdict but
little over half of these were able to demonstrate a level of understanding
considered minimal to making a Bayesian decision.61 This "minimum level"
indicator was a set of correct answers to five early questions in the questionnaire
reached, overall, by 41 per cent of respondents. This figure broke down to 18 per
cent (2 years of secondary education or less), 37 per cent (3 or more years of
secondary education), and 57 per cent (university education) indicating a very
strong relationship to education.
Can jurors be brought to the necessary competence with statistical matters by
educating them in court? Before hearing the audio tape with the information
about the blood tests, half of the respondents in the Canberra project heard a
brief exposition of how statistical data can assist courts to determine the weight
of identification evidence. No significant difference was found between the
results from those who were briefed about statistics and those who were not. If
this is any guide, courts have to use jurors as they find them; instruction given
during the case may not be effective.
Statistical obfuscation
Although statistical reasoning is unavoidably complex the issue here is the very
avoidable complexity with which it is embroidered when it comes to court.
Odds ratios: Because of the prevalence of betting, odds ratios are well
understood and reasoned with by a sizeable part of the population.
Probabilities are a different matter.
Having it both ways: Because of the bias in the expression of probabilities
and the risk that jurors will not realise that a high probability of exclusion
is equivalent to a low probability of inclusion, it is important to state the
data in both ways. Thus, a statement like "there is a 3 per cent chance that
a person drawn at random from the population will test positive for the
same antibody" should have the opposite statement added at the end –
"there is a 97 per cent chance that a person drawn at random ... will not
test positive ...".
Do not elaborate: A frequent source of confusion is the attempt by the
teacher (lawyer) to explain in a second sentence what was meant in the
first. It should be avoided and the statement made so clear at the outset
that repetition becomes unnecessary. Spontaneous presentations are
unlikely to be safe; lawyers, judges and experts should read from carefully
constructed notes.
Jargon: In statistics, as in every other field of study, a specialised
vocabulary helps the practitioner say exactly what he or she means but it
makes the subject obscure. It takes real expertise to be accurate and
understandable at the same time.
Achievable Goals
The frequently reported death of the jury system is, of course, greatly
exaggerated but it is true that its public esteem is shrinking. Arguably, much of
that has followed its poor performance in dealing with statistics and probabilities.
What follows are suggestions for optimising the performance of courts
constituted, be it emphasised, in their present form. The first is rather general.
Comprehensibility does not matter, assessability does
In an age of unparalleled discovery it is no surprise that science and technology
should come to court or that the attendant complexity should, at times, threaten
the process. Almost without exception moves to change the jury system are urged
on the ground that cases in which complex evidence is important it is likely to be
misunderstood by lay juries. However, the thing for counsel, judges and juries to
do about that is not to try to mop up the water that is swamping them but to
learn to swim in it. The challenge is not to try to understand someone else's
specialised knowledge but to assess it.
The complexity problem is not unique; decision-makers in government and
commerce have also been challenged by the need to act on information they do
not understand. They have responded by introducing a process characterised by
the word "advice" and in no place is it more needed than when the court is asked
to consider statistical or probabilistic evidence. With the proper advice, lay courts
and lay juries can equip themselves to take on complex statistical evidence.
Instead of role play, trying to comprehend and then adjudicate reasoning in
which they are incompetent they should require the expert witnesses from the
two sides to provide them with (a) criteria for judging their submissions and (b)
evidence that those criteria were met. When the evidence is of a routine kind, the
courts could obtain the criteria they want in advance, calling on sources such as
national professional organisations or statutory bodies to provide the authority
that they do not have of themselves. Where the evidence is especially complex or
causes major conflict, those same sources may be required to provide
representative professional opinion as to the criteria needed to evaluate it. In this
kind of environment, the pressure is on the expert to ensure that their
contribution is not so much comprehensible as assessable.
Admissibility versus Strength
Uncertainties about whether a tissue sample from a crime scene was
contaminated or not, about whether chemical reagents were properly
standardised, about whether control experiments were carried out are issues
incommensurate with issues of the weight of the evidence obtained from it. It is
beyond the competence of jurors to combine the two kinds of uncertainty to
reach a single decision, especially when the evidence is probabilistic. Although
questions about the way samples were handled are often considered appropriate
for the jury, there are strong reasons why this may be wrong. This argument
applies equally strongly to questions about the validity of statistical evidence.
Judges would never hand to the jury a decision about evidence which might
have been wrongly obtained or evidence which is hearsay. It would be
unthinkable to ask them to combine that probability with the probability implied
by the weight of the evidence. In such a case, entirely parallel with the present
one, prejudice is avoided by determining issues of admissibility before the jury
knows anything about the evidence. It would be a wise course for the courts to
accept responsibility for ensuring that the evidence is safe for the jury to hear,
and for judges routinely to schedule pre-trial hearings for that purpose whether
the admissibility issues are scientific procedures or statistical ones. The jury is
then given a clean slate for the difficult job of weighing the evidence. Recent
cases in Australia and, indeed, around the world, have seen major challenges to
standard DNA testing procedures which were handled by voire dire hearings of
unprecedented length. The recommendation here is to make the pre-trial hearing
standard practice and for judges to dispose of the issue themselves. If criteria for
accepting scientific and statistical evidence can be created, then judges should
decide whether the evidence is safe for the jury to hear or not. The jury then
decides what the evidence is worth.
The attitude of judges to the issue of what the jury should and should not hear
is divided but in Australia, under current legislation, almost all would probably
withhold claims of faulty laboratory procedures or incorrect statistical methods
from the jury. In R v Humphrey62 Bleby J applied the reasoning of Mullighan J in
R v Jarrett,63 the first major Australian challenge to the admissibility of DNA
profile evidence by advanced DNA profile methods. He ruled that conflicting
expert evidence about databases should go to the jury. The appellate court's
attitude in R v Doheny and Adams64 was expressed as "Any issue of expert
evidence should be identified and, if possible, resolved before trial."
A further reason for not giving juries two tasks to carry out at the same time is
because of the risk that the sheer size of the likelihood ratios obtained by modern
DNA profile methods will overwhelm jurors and lead them to assume that
questions of the validity of the evidence no longer matter.
Statistical standards are issues on which standard procedures have been
developed in connection with the accreditation of laboratories and for which
quality assurance criteria are routinely applied. To achieve maximum assurance
about its decisions, courts should receive independent advice from organisations
at the level of the Australian Academy of Science or, in the United Kingdom, the
Royal Society rather than rely on unrepresentative precedents established in
individual cases. That consensus is possible between prosecution and defence
counsel and scientists was demonstrated by the New York Supreme Court's
admissibility hearing and the subsequent ruling in the Castro case.65
Saying what will help the court
How DNA profile evidence should be given to the jury has occupied the minds of
many judges. DNA evidence is now usually extremely strong but the words used
to say so can be confusing. Evett et al66 considered the recommendations of a
number of English appellate judgments, not all consistent with one another, and
their considered opinion is that the witness tell the jury how to combine the
random match probability with the prior odds of guilt, using Bayes' Law, to reach
a posterior odds of guilt. Experience in the Canberra mock jury project suggests
that jurors need assistance at precisely that level. The example given by Evett et
al, modified here by the use of odds ratios rather than probabilities, is:
If the court considered, based on other evidence, that the odds of the crime stain being left by the
defendant were a million to one against, then the effect of the DNA evidence is to change those odds to a
thousand to one in favour.
Balding has also argued67 that the evidence presented to the court should focus
on the "directly relevant issue" which is "whether or not the defendant is the
source of the crime stain". As he says, it makes more efficient use of the evidence.
Evett et al argue that their suggestion does not infringe the jury's prerogative,
their statement being merely an illustration of the standard logic for statistical
results of this kind. Their basic point is that the extremely small random match
probabilities of current DNA profile technology, while not justifying
individualisation (statements that "the crime scene sample came from the
suspect") should yet be recognised by courts for their strength.
An alternative way of explaining to the court how the evidence of this strength
might be used is for counsel to lead jurors through the kind of "minimal level"
Bayes pathway explored in the author's Canberra project, doing this before the
expert witness is brought on rather than later so as to distance the explanation
from the particular evidence the jury will later have to decide about.68 The
responses from that survey showed that the proper use of identification evidence
by jurors cannot be taken for granted. To obviate the haphazard but binding
judgments of courts in relation to evidence as powerful as DNA profiles have
now become, not to mention future enhancements of the technology, it would be
wise for the matter to be taken up by law reform commissions. As experience so
far has shown, over-interpretation of the evidence is possible as well as under-
interpretation. Correctives to both must be available.
* Associate Professor in the School of Chemistry, the University College of the Australian Defence Force
Academy of the University of New South Wales. I thank Ms Katrin Both, Professor Ian Freckelton, Dr
Roger Magnusson, Ms Kylie Patchett and Mrs Rhonda Wheate for advice and assistance with sources.
1 Scientists frequently subdivide accuracy into two components, precision (repeated measurements all
very close together but not necessarily close to the correct value) and accuracy (with their average
close to the correct value but not necessarily precise).
2 R Eggleston, Evidence, Proof and Probability, 2nd edn, Weidenfeld and Nicholson, London, 1983.
3 SE Fienberg (ed), The Evolving Role of Statistical Assessments as Evidence in the Courts, Springer
Verlag, New York, 1989.
4 In Australia the accreditation of government forensic science services has reached an advanced stage
and is coordinated by the National Institute of Forensic Science.
5 Not all laboratories are accredited nor all areas of expertise covered by professional codes of conduct.
6 Irrespective of content, scientific evidence can be subdivided into the Qualitative, Quantitative,
Comparison-based and Subjective Evaluation categories. An example of the last is psychiatric
evidence relating to fitness to plead, depending on multiple factors and not easily reduced to cause-
and-effect argument.
7 See. for example, DW Barnes, Statistics as Proof, Little, Brown, Boston, 1983.
8 MH DeGroot, SE Fienberg & JB Kadane (eds), Statistics and the Law, Wiley, New York, 1986.
9 In the year 1978 almost 6,000 employment discrimination cases were initiated in the federal district
courts of the United States.
10 Fienberg, op cit, n3.
11 Vuyanich v Republic National Bank, 24 FEP Cases 128 (ND Texas 1980), vac and rem'd, 723 F 2d 1195
(1984).
12 In a personal communication, a colleague of Sir Ronald Fisher while attached to the University of
Adelaide in his retirement tells of the great statistician's reaction to the epidemiological studies which
first established the link between smoking and lung cancer. Fisher asked whether susceptibility to
lung cancer was inherited by certain people along with their predilections to tobacco smoking. It
sounds ludicrous now that it is known how carcinogens damage cell growth control systems,
allowing cells ultimately to transform and grow uncontrollably, but it was a theoretically proper
hypothesis at the time.
13 Fienberg, op cit, n3, at pl26 et seq.
14 "Power" is a technical term. It means the ability of a test to reject the null hypothesis –in other words,
to provide high levels of confidence that a result is not just due to random fluctuation of a variable.
15 Average personal income in Ruritania may be a wonderful $50,000 pa, but the high figure may be due
to several billionaires living in a highly deprived country, not a high and uniform standard of living.
It is hazardous to assume that the variance is small and that individuals are all close to the average.
16 The second quotation, here quoted loosely, was from the South Australian case of R v Splatt (see Royal
Commission, Report Concerning the Conviction of Edward Charles Splatt, South Australian
Government Printer, Adelaide, 1984) which made Australian legal history, inciting the government to
establish a professional forensic science service which became a model for other Australian states and
overseas.
17 See B Selinger, "Scientific Evaluation", in I Freckelton & H Selby (eds), Expert Evidence, 5 volume
looseleaf service, Law Book Co, Sydney, 1993-..., 2-523.
18 P Hall & B Selinger, "Statistical Significance: Balancing Evidence Against Doubt" (1986) 28 Aust J Stats
354.
19 DW Vick, "Statistical Significance and the Significance of Statistics" (2000) 116 Law Quart Rev 575-82.
This author notes that the term "statistical significance" is sometimes used in technical discussions in
court without their being aware of its technical meaning.
20 H Solomon, "Confidence Intervals in Legal Settings", in DeGroot, Fienberg & Kadane, op cit, n8.
21 KF Schutz et al, "Empirical Evidence of Bias: Dimensions of Methodological Quality Associated With
Estimates of Treatment Effects in Controlled Trials" (1995) 273 J Am Medical Ass 408.
22 A Tversky & D Kahneman, "Judgment under Uncertainty: Heuristics and Biases" (1974) 185 Science
1124; D Kahneman, P Slovic & A Tversky, Judgment under Uncertainty: Heuristics and Biases,
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1982.
23 See, for example, JD Jackson, "Towards a Dialectic Theory of Proof for Legal Procedure" (1991) 154 J R
Statist Soc A 107.
24 M Piatelli-Palmarini, Inevitable Illusions, J Wiley, New York, 1994.
25 Eggleston, op cit, n2, Chapter 3.
26 JL Cohen, The Probable and the Provable, Oxford University Press, Oxford, 1977.
27 CCG Aitken, Statistics and the Evaluation of Evidence for Forensic Scientists, John Wiley, New York,
1995.
28 RJ Simon & L Mahan, "Quantifying Burdens of Proof" (1971) 5 Law and Society Review 319.
29 See, for example, Malec v J C Hutton Pty Ltd (1990) CLR 638.
30 Ethyl Corporation v Environmental Protection Agency, 541 F 2d 1 (DC Cir 1976).
31 Fienberg, op cit, n3.
32 WC Thompson. "Are Juries Competent to Evaluate Statistical Evidence?" (1989) 52 Law Contemp
Problems 9; DH Kaye & JJ Koehler, "Can Jurors Understand Probabilistic Evidence?" (1991) 154 J R
Statist Soc A 75.
33 E Magnusson, Jury Comprehension of Statistical Evidence, Australian Institute of Criminology
Conference, 1994. Respondents in small family groups heard an audio tape simulating the judge's
summing up of a criminal trial and then discussed the issues as small juries. Their individual
responses were used to test (a) the comprehension of statistical information given and (b) the
apparent mental pathway taken through evidence given in a Bayesian format.
34 Random match probability (using a battery of blood tests) 5 per cent.
35 The commercial profiling systems "Profiler Plus" (now adopted in Australia for evidence to be used in
the national offender database) and "SGM Plus" (used in the United Kingdom for the National DNA
Database) both use 10 probes and likelihood ratios in the range "10 billion to one" to "100 trillion to
one" would be expected. However, caution is used in the calculations and the results actually reported
are usually one or two orders of magnitude smaller. The United Kingdom Forensic Science Service
has the policy of uniformly reporting these extremely large odds as "10 billion to one" to obviate
difficulties due to the lack of scientific evidence to support the independence of loci to this level.
36 This section concentrates on DNA profile evidence in criminal courts but, of course, the technology is
widely used in other legal settings including paternity disputes, verification of family relationships in
immigration applications (United Kingdom) and inheritance claims, disaster victim identification,
and missing person identification.
37 Other manifestations are the multi-locus probe, Polymerase Chain Reaction method plus promoter to
produce protein then identified with a spot test, mitochondrial DNA analysis etc.
38 Once separated from the rest of the DNA the sizes of the segments can be measured by electrophoresis.
Each probe recognises fragments from one particular location (the "locus") of one particular pair of
chromosomes, so, because of the pairing, fragments of two sizes will be found. Characterised by their
size, they can be related to the two parents of the individual from whom the tissue originated, the
double set of chromosomes in each cell having come originally from the single set contributed by
each parent at conception. Numerous loci exist, on different chromosomes, each with inherited
segments of varying length and, providing that probes can be found to recognise them, they can all
be separated and their size measured in a single operation. The evidence is often presented by a
barcode-like diagram of the fragment sizes.
39 The Perkin-EImer Corporation's "Profiler Plus" system is licensed to Australian forensic science
laboratories and used uniformly by all states for the investigation of crime and for the
Commonwealth-wide offender database.
40 See Aitken, op cit, n27.
41 WC Thompson & EL Schumann, "Interpretation of Statistical Evidence in Criminal Trials: The
Prosecutor's Fallacy and the Defense Attorney's Fallacy" (1987) 11 Law Hum Behav 167.
42 There are numerous matters which can only be resolved by consideration of the statistics of scientific
trials of the methodology: whether or not Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium has been reached in a
population, band shifting relative to laboratory variation of fragment sizes, possible interdependence
of alleles, race variations in the frequencies of alleles in populations and in their independence, the
desirability of using the "ceiling principle" etc. They lie beyond the scope of this section. Some of
them are becoming less important as newer technology is introduced, others as databases become
larger.
43 Doheny and Adams [1997] 1 Cr App R 369.
44 Adams (Denis) (No 2) [1998] 1 Cr App R 377, CA.
45 IW Evett, LA Foreman, G Jackson & JA Lambert, "DNA Profiling: A Discussion of Issues Relating to the
Reporting of Very Small Match Probabilities" (2000) Crim L R 431.
46 DH Kaye, "Bible Reading: DNA Evidence in Arizona" (1997) 28 Arizona State Law Journal 1035.
47 State v Bible, 858 P 2d 1152 (Ariz 1993), cert denied, 114 S Ct 1578 (1994).
48 Cellmark was the well known United States commercial laboratory carrying out the profiles.
49 R v Lucas (1992) 55 A Crim R 361; [1992] 2 VR 109.
50 R v Milat (1996) 87 A Crim R 446.
51 R v Pantoja (1996) 88 A Crim R 554.
52 R v Karger [2001] SASC 64.
53 After analysis of the database the Fst relatedness parameter, which is the probability that alleles within
a population have a common ancestor, was estimated to be close to 1 per cent but was arbitrarily set
at a more conservative 3 per cent. Such a value for Fst is equivalent to all individuals in the database
being related to the level of second cousins. The likelihood ratio was calculated by using the
procedure described in the widely distributed second report of the United States National Research
Council. National Research Council, "Report II, The Evaluation of Forensic DNA Evidence" (1999);
the procedure appears as Equation 4.10.
54 [1998] 1 Cr App R 377, CA.
55 [1997] 1 Cr App R 369.
56 In this case the DNA profile evidence was incriminating but other evidence supported the defendant's
account. A defence witness explained (correctly) how Bayes' Law permitted 20 likelihood ratios for 20
different items of non-scientific evidence to be combined mathematically and used to convert a prior
probability of guilt into a posterior probability. It was this proposal that attracted the disapproval of
the United Kingdom Court of Criminal Appeal.
57 Investigators almost universally record the complaint from jurors about the difficulty of keeping track
of the overall argument during a trial. Some commentators have argued the need to restructure the
way in which evidence is marshalled during the adversarial court process; see, for example, Jackson,
op cit, n23.
58 For example, the "inference chart" concept proposed by E Magnusson & BK Selinger, "Forensic Science
in Court" (1988) 12 Crim Law J 86.
59 A complete inference chart includes procedural steps (chain of evidence items, sample identification),
accreditation steps (qualifications of the scientific expert, accreditation of the laboratory), laboratory
investigation steps (choice of procedure, standardisation of reagents, instrument accuracy checks,
positive and negative controls), statistical analysis steps and, finally, the steps required in formulating
the expert's conclusions for the report.
60 UE Makov, "A Bayesian Treatment of the 'Missing Suspect' Problem in Forensic Science" (1987) 36 The
Statistician 251.
61 This minimum level of understanding was taken to be demonstrated by correct answers to the first five
questions. The answers were: (1) No, a person can't be proved Guilty; (2) Yes, a person can be Proved
Not Guilty; (3) If the odds of guilt were 1-to-1, the risk of convicting the wrong person would be 50%;
(4) No, that's not acceptable; (5) Odds get Bigger when blood evidence is included.
62 R v Humphrey (1999) 103 A Crim R 434.
63 R v Jarrett (1994) 73 A Crim R 160.
64 [1997] 1 Cr App R 369.
65 People v Castro, 144 Misc 2d 956; 545 NYS 2d 985 (NY 1989).
66 Evett, Foreman, Jackson & Lambert, op cit n45.
67 DJ Balding, "When Can a DNA Profile be Regarded as Unique?" (1999) 39 Science and Justice 257. This
important paper shows how a correction can be made to random match statistics to allow for the
possibility that a relative of the defendant could have contributed the evidence (brothers and, to a
lesser extent, uncles, nephews and cousins, obviously have a higher probability of producing the
similar profiles than do other persons in the population).
68 Using language designed to avoid jargon, while still familiarising the court with probability reasoning,
the lawyer could say: Suppose you were watching a case on TV where the evidence linking the
defendant to the scene of a crime was weak. All the court knew was that the defendant could have
been around at the time. Before the jury even knew that there would be DNA evidence one juror
muttered to another that it was about fifty-fifty that he was guilty, in other words, odds of one-to-
one. Suppose the rest of the jury agreed that the odds were one-to-one. And suppose that, without
knowing it, they were right and the odds really were one-to-one because there were only two people
who could have committed the crime and the defendant was one of them! Now, if the jury thinks that
fifty-fifty odds are good enough for a conviction, what is the chance that they would convict an
innocent person? 50 per cent, of course. Would that be good enough for you? Of course not! But now
they bring on the DNA evidence and show that the profile taken from the crime scene is very similar
to the profile taken from the sample taken from the defendant when he was in custody. The
prosecution expert is asked if the profiles come from the same person but he says he does not know.
What he does know is that the similarity of these two profiles is estimated to be three million times
more likely to be found if the sample at the crime scene came from the defendant than by chance
from some other person. Does that effect the odds that the defendant is guilty? The expert says it
does and tells the jury, "whatever the odds were originally, after measuring how similar the two
profiles are, the odds that the crime scene sample came from the defendant are, according to my
estimate, three million times higher".