18 Causation in the Context of Medical
Practitioners’ Liability for Negligent
Advice
JOHN DOYLE*
Introduction
The law to be applied in Australia in deciding issues of causation in the law of
tort is settled by March v Stramare.1 In most situations, a sufficient causal
connection between an act of negligence and an injury is established by showing
that the plaintiff would not have sustained the injury complained of but for the
negligence of the defendant, or had the defendant not been negligent. That test,
however, is neither a comprehensive nor an exclusive criterion for liability. There
are situations in which a closer analysis of the question of causation must be
made.
The judgments in March v Stramare indicate that the "but for" test can be
applied as a negative or exclusionary test of causation in almost all cases. If the
plaintiff cannot satisfy the "but for" test, then in most cases the plaintiff's claim
will fail. The fact that the plaintiff can satisfy the "but for" test does not mean
that the plaintiff's claim will necessarily succeed. The "but for" test cannot be
applied as a negative criterion of causation in cases where there are two or more
acts or events which would each be sufficient to bring about the plaintiff's
injury.2 Later decisions of the High Court, for example Bennett v Minister of
Community Welfare3 and Chappel v Hart4 demonstrate that difficult issues in the
area of causation will continue to arise.
Particular problems can arise in the area of negligent advice by medical
practitioners. The extent of the duty to advise has been settled by the High Court
in Rogers v Whitaker,5 but the application of this duty gives rise to practical
problems. Issues of causation are complicated by the fact that there are risks
inherent in most procedures.
In Chappel v Hart, in relation to establishing causation in connection with
medical negligence, Kirby J observed that the state of the law:
causes dissatisfaction to litigants, anguish for their advisers, uncertainty for Judges, agitation among
commentators and friction between health care professionals and their legal counterparts.6
Whether that rather gloomy diagnosis is correct I do not know, but there can
be no doubting the difficulty of the legal and medical issues that can arise. In this
commentary I do not intend to analyse the case law in detail. My aim is to raise
for consideration some issues in relation to the workings of the principles of
causation in the context of liability for negligent medical advice.
I propose to comment on two aspects of the relevant principles: first, the duty
to advise about the risks involved in undergoing surgery and secondly, the
circumstances in which liability is imposed for risks inherent in surgery, after a
failure to provide advice when it should have been provided.
Causation in Context
The importance of the concept of causation in the law of tort, and in the law of
negligence in particular, is obvious. A function, or perhaps the function of the
concept of causation in negligence, is to define the outer limits of harm or loss
suffered by other persons for which the defendant may be held liable, if found to
have been negligent.
Causation is concerned with allocating legal responsibility for harm or damage
suffered by a plaintiff. That process of allocating legal responsibility has various
aspects. A claim for damages is a claim to attribute legal responsibility, on the
basis of fault, to another person for harm suffered by the plaintiff and, by an
award of damages, a claim to shift the loss from the plaintiff to the defendant.
Such a claim does not raise only technical legal considerations. It also raises
fundamental issues of justice. Such a claim should be disposed of by applying
clearly articulated legal principles, principles that reflect coherent policy
considerations, and principles that accord with community conceptions of justice.
As well, we need to recall that the concept of cause and effect is applied in
everyday life. There is an everyday notion of cause, and of limits to the result of
what we do. The law needs to keep an eye on the everyday notion.
A claim against a medical practitioner for negligent advice requires the court
to make an assessment of the competence of the practitioner. A finding of
negligence will be significant for the medical practitioner, quite apart from its
financial implications, and even if the defendant is fully insured, A finding of
negligence will usually involve a significant reflection on the medical practitioner
concerned.
No doubt many plaintiffs regard a favourable verdict as some kind of
vindication of the plaintiff's complaints, and an unfavourable verdict as an
adverse reflection on the plaintiff. A decision on such a claim may well affect the
mariner in which a particular aspect of medical practice is conducted. Various
judgments refer to the capacity of the law in this area to deter or discourage bad
practice, and proceed on the assumption that a function of the law is to promote
good practice.
The other side of the coin is that the prospect of liability may encourage an
approach to treatment which is excessively cautious, or which results in
unnecessary costs being incurred by patients and by public funds.
There are also claims that the risk or fear of liability, as a result of decisions in
widely publicised cases, leads to medical practitioners withdrawing their services
from high risk areas of practice, to the general detriment of the public. The
literature suggests that well publicised findings of liability in particular cases,
based on evidence given in a particular case, can cause the public to believe that
particular medical procedures or approaches are unsafe, when that is not so. The
result can be a loss of faith in procedures that offer real benefits to the public.
Finally, most would agree that as far as possible the law should be reasonably
comprehensible by lawyers and by those to whom it is applied.
These observations are intended to make the point that the concept of
causation, when applied to the liability of a medical practitioner for negligent
advice, plays an important part in a process that is directed to the allocation of
legal responsibility for identified harm or loss, but the process gives rise to a
number of other considerations and can have significant consequences beyond
the decision between the immediate parties. It is legitimate to raise these other
considerations when considering the soundness of the concept.
In this commentary, it is not possible to canvass all these issues. But they
cannot be ignored. At the end of the day, the state of the law in this area must be
assessed by taking account of considerations of this sort.
A Diversion
A claim for medical negligence necessarily involves a very close examination of
the facts of a particular case. It is only that case that the judge is called to decide.
But in deciding the case, the judge must apply the standard of a reasonably
competent practitioner, and so must apply a standard which is capable of general
application. However, in deciding the particular case, it is very difficult, perhaps
impossible, for the judge to assess adequately the impact of the particular
decision if applied to medical practice generally.
There is no obvious solution to this problem. The duty of the judge is to decide
the particular case. Inevitably, others will generalise from the decision of the
court. There is an obvious risk of a judge imposing a particular standard of
practice, in the context of a particular case, which will have untoward
consequences when applied to medical practice generally.
Another difficulty in litigation over medical negligence is the dependence of
the court upon the expert evidence presented by the parties. The court is in the
hands of the parties. It is quite possible that, in the context of a particular case, a
judge will be persuaded to accept the views of a medical expert even though,
unknown to the judge, those views are in conflict with views generally held
within the profession, or are even wrong. Much can depend upon the skill with
which the respective cases are presented, and the apparent quality of the expert
medical evidence presented to the judge. Once again, there is no escape from this.
Our system relies upon the parties to present the best evidence.
Finally, the judge must decide the particular case presented to the judge for or
against the plaintiff, on the evidence presented and on the balance of
probabilities. The judge cannot defer a decision, awaiting scientific developments.
The judge cannot decline to make a decision, or record a draw.
Neither of these points has anything in particular to do with the principles of
causation. I mention them merely to highlight some sensitive aspects of litigation
over medical negligence, and to emphasise that it is not surprising that medical
practitioners should, at times, be critical of the processes of the courts and of the
results of particular cases. These criticisms are likely to surface in the
consideration of causation cases.
I mention them also as an introduction to a related point made by Professor
Fiona Stanley in the second Eleanor Shaw lecture7 when she said:
Litigation, by use of selective or misleading evidence and fanned by a media whose aim is to sell rather
than to inform, can drive us away from making the best decisions in medicine – those which have the
potential to help the majority that rarely may harm or not benefit the individual.
The modern sciences of public health ie epidemiology and statistics are now of enormous importance,
they have a population focus. They determine, as rigorously as possible, whether associations are real
and whether they are likely to be causal. Courtroom trials are quintessentially singular, framing facts in
isolation and demand that scientific truths be rediscovered anew every time. They often are influenced
by biased expert witnesses, who present an extreme and outrageous view which is not the general
consensus of knowledge.
Professor Stanley went on to illustrate her point by reference to four areas in
which she asserted that litigation has had a negative effect on the practice of
medicine or public health. I will mention one only, to illustrate her point.
Cervical cancer is the seventh commonest cancer in Australian women, with
1,700 new cases per year. Screening healthy women is an attempt to identify
abnormalities in women who have no symptoms, and thus give them and their
doctors an idea of their risk status. Such tests are not diagnostic of cancer. The
tests can give false positives and false negatives. According to Professor Stanley,
publicity has been given to recent litigation involving women who have claimed
that their cancers were not picked up by the screening process. She maintained
that this is not a failure of the screening program, nor a result of negligence on
the part of the laboratory. It is to be expected that in rare cases a false negative
will occur. Professor Stanley said that this litigation, and the publicity given to it,
have had negative effects on public health. There has been a marked increase in
referrals for slightly abnormal smears, with increased cost and anxiety to women.
The cost of the program has increased, because of more repeat tests, more
examinations and so on. Fewer women are attending for screening, having been
put off the screening program by adverse publicity. Trained people have left the
relevant areas of medical practice, because they do not like being sued, There is
an encouragement to search for new technologies or tests which may bring very
small gains of increased accuracy, but carry with them considerable increases in
cost.
I am unable to comment on Professor Stanley's observations, I refer to them in
this context to make the point that it is important that, putting it colloquially, the
courts get it right. Although a judge sits to decide a case between particular
parties, the principles that the judge applies, and the outcome of the case, can
have far-reaching effects.
Perhaps in the development and application of the relevant legal principles, we
need to be better informed about issues like this. But there is a problem. The
principles of causation are applied in all areas of negligence, and more generally
in the law of tort. We cannot fashion the relevant principles by reference to their
impact in the area of medical negligence. And, as will he evident, some of
Professor Stanley's concerns relate to the adversarial process, although her
concern about attributing responsibility for false negatives might involve issues
of causation.
At the end of the day, it may be that we can do no more than acknowledge
that the principles that we apply and the decisions that the courts make have
important ramifications for those who must and do adjust their conduct by
reference to the decisions of the courts.
How Does One Assess the Legal Concept of
Causation?
Once one moves beyond a critical consideration of the approach to causation, it is
not easy to say how best to assess the adequacy of the existing concepts. I suspect
that in the ordinary case the approach of the courts to causation has been quite
satisfactory, by and large. In the ordinary case, the issue of causation is
straightforward. If this is so, one could say that the fact that there are hard cases,
causing the sort of dismay to which Justice Kirby alluded, is of no great
significance. The other approach is to say that the measure of an approach to
causation is how well it grapples with the hard case. In the straightforward cases
one can get to the right answer almost intuitively, and what we need is a sound
test for the hard cases. That is how I am proposing to approach the matter in this
commentary.
The “But For” Test
What follows is just a brief description of the approach affirmed in March v
Stramare. It is drawn mainly from the judgment of Chief Justice Mason. The
High Court has emphasised that the legal concept of causation differs from
philosophical and scientific notions of causation. Those concepts were developed
in the context of explaining phenomena by reference to the relationship between
conditions and occurrences. In a court, on the other hand, problems of causation
arise in the context of determining legal responsibility for a given occurrence.
What this seems to mean is that the law determines causation for a particular
purpose, namely the attribution of legal responsibility. The reason or purpose for
attributing responsibility should therefore shape the approach to the concept of
causation.
The legal approach to causation is likely to differ from the medical approach. A
doctor looks for causes in the interests of prevention and cure. The law looks for
a cause, or the cause of an event, with a view to attributing liability for the event.
We should be able to say that the legal concept of causation is one which
attributes responsibility when it is appropriate to do so, and does not attribute
responsibility when it is not appropriate to do so. But appropriate to do so or not
appropriate to do so by what measure or standard? An obvious, if circular one, is
by the standard of doing justice as between the parties. More debatable is the
question of whether and to what extent, some of the wider considerations
identified by me are relevant here. It may be that Sir Anthony Mason's statement
about the context in which causation arises is really a truism. Perhaps it means
nothing more than that the law must set some limits to the concept of causation,
when attributing legal responsibility. That is not contestable. How it sets the
limits is critical.
The legal concept of causation is a question of fact, to be determined by
applying common sense lo the facts of each case. This statement may also be
something of a truism. In jurisdictions in which civil juries are used, the question
of causation is one for the jury. But much of the reasoning in the High Court
cases looks like reasoning in terms of rules of law to me. The emphasis in the
judgments here seems to be that the application of the but for test must be
tempered by common sense considerations, and also by the making of value
judgments and infusion of policy considerations.
In March v Stramare Mason CJ referred with approval to remarks of Dixon CJ,
Fullagar and Kitto JJ in Fitzgerald v Penn8 to the effect that "it is all ultimately a
matter of common sense", and "In truth the conception in question [ie, causation]
is not susceptible of reduction to a satisfactory formula".9 When one sees the
emphasis put upon the role of common sense in determining issues of causation,
and the emphasis upon value judgments and the infusion of policy
considerations, one is forewarned that in the difficult and unusual cases things
are going to get difficult.
Things are going to get difficult because, in the end, the judge will have to
attribute legal responsibility for a putative consequence, or refuse to attribute
legal responsibility. And in making that choice the judge will have to decide that
particular facts or aspects of the case are a reason to make that decision, It is
making that choice, and explaining it, and justifying it by policy considerations,
that is difficult in the hard cases. It is important that talk about causation should
not mask the selection of reasons for attributing liability.
It is no criticism of judges to say that in the hard cases they will sometimes
differ about what is a common sense result and what is a sound policy outcome.
The decision in Chappel v Hart is a sufficient illustration of this. There, in what is
undeniably a difficult and unusual case, a decision finding that the defendant had
caused the relevant loss was upheld by a three-two majority, Each group invoked
arguments based on policy and common sense. One of the things that I find
interesting about the more difficult cases is that, despite what Sir Anthony Mason
said, one does not find much overt reference to value judgments and policy
considerations. My impression is that, by and large, the judges are endeavouring
to apply a "but for" approach, but to do so in a common sense and practical
fashion. In Chappel v Hart Kirby J observed that in deciding the question of
causation "there is usually a large element of intuition in deciding such questions
which may be insusceptible to detailed and analytical justification".10 But he went
on to say that the losing party has a right to know why it has lost, and that this
imposes an obligation upon the courts to elaborate their reasons for reaching a
conclusion. I suspect, with respect, that there is a good deal of truth in what
Kirby J says, and that many judges are trying to articulate reasons for a result
which intuitively they think is right and just.
In March v Stramare Deane J said that: "The question whether conduct is a
'cause' of injury, remains to be determined by a value judgment involving
ordinary notions of language and common sense."11 We also know that the "but
for" test will generally not provide a satisfactory answer in cases in which a
supervening event, deliberate or negligent, is said to break the chain of causation
or to terminate the liability of the defendant for a consequence.
In this area there are some propositions that seem reasonably well established,
If the defendant's negligence merely secures the presence of the plaintiff at the
time when, and the place where, he or she is injured, it will not be causally
connected with that injury, unless the risk of the accident occurring at that time
was greater. Unless the risk was greater, the supervening injury will usually
terminate the chain of causation. The causal connection between a defendant's
negligence and injury to a plaintiff may also be negatived by deliberate conduct
of another person, or a deliberate omission, which is intended to exploit the
situation created by the defendant. Negligent or unreasonable conduct by another
person, causing injury to the plaintiff, may also terminate the chain of causation,
but will not do so if the possibility of such an event was the sort of thing against
which is it was the duty of the defendant to safeguard the plaintiff.
A later act of negligence causing injury will also not terminate the chain of
causation if it was in the ordinary course of things the kind of thing that was
likely to happen, For that reason, if a plaintiff is negligently treated and seeks
further treatment from another doctor, and that doctor treats the plaintiff
negligently, usually the original doctor will remain liable for all of the foreseeable
consequences. However, the cases suggest that if the negligence of the second
doctor is extreme or is quite out of the ordinary, then the chain of causation may
be terminated.
What we see here is a number of signposts or guides to decision-making. But
the manner in which the particular rules are expressed, indicates that there is
plenty of leeway for differences of opinion when applying the rules.
The Duty to Advise
In Rogers v Whitaker the surgeon in question was found to have conducted an
operation on the plaintiff's eye with the required level of skill and care.
Nevertheless, a condition ensued which, on the evidence, occurred once in
approximately 14,000 such procedures. The plaintiff was an anxious patient, and
addressed many questions to the surgeon about possible complications. She was
not warned about the particular complication which occurred. This was
devastating for the plaintiff. She had virtually no sight in one eye. The operation
was being performed on her good eye. The end result was that she was virtually
blind.
In the area of advice, the decision makes two important points. The first is that it
is for the courts to decide what is the required standard of care, and not for
medical practice or opinion to do that. Evidence of acceptable medical
practice is a useful guide, but no more than that. Accordingly, the question of
the advice that should be given to a patient was not to be determined solely
by reference to medical opinion.
The High Court held that:
The law should recognise that a doctor has a duty to warn a patient of a material risk inherent in the
proposed treatment; a risk is material if, in the circumstances of the particular case, a reasonable person
in the patient's position, if warned of the risk, would be likely to attach significance to it or if the medical
practitioner is or should reasonably be aware that the particular patient, if warned of the risk, would be
likely to attach significance to it. This duty is subject to the therapeutic privilege.12
This requirement is an onerous one, emphasised by the fact that the risk of
which the plaintiff was not informed was one of an adverse outcome in one in
14,000 such procedures.
Advice about Risks
All surgery involves risks. Without any lack of care, something can go wrong. We
read that merely being admitted to a hospital carries with it a not insignificant
risk of infection. It appears that a material risk of which a doctor must warn a
patient may be a risk that is quite remote. The doctor must consider what a
reasonable person would think, but also has to consider the anxieties and
concerns of the particular patient. It is no criticism of the approach taken by the
High Court to say that it is likely to give rise to some difficult questions.
Presumably all inherent risks of a procedure should be canvassed, except those
that are so remote that no reasonable person would take account of them, and as
to which there is no reason to think that the particular patient would have a
concern. How does a doctor decide the point at which a risk becomes so remote
that it can be disregarded? Presumably, in deciding that, the doctor has to weigh
up the incidence of the risk and the nature of the outcome should it eventuate. A
difficult judgment is involved here. The answer might depend upon refined
statistical analysis. It will be tempting for doctors to play safe and to advise of
almost all conceivable risks. Ironically, this could either deaden the impact of
advice about significant risks, or alternatively paralyse the patient with fear. And
is a doctor bound to deal with what might be called associated risks? What about
the risk of the anaesthetist making a mistake? What about the risk of infection in
the hospital? There are also difficulties with the question of how the advice is to
be given. How much time is the doctor required to spend explaining what might
be quite difficult issues to the patient? How do doctor and patient cope with the
statistics, or can the doctor use every day expressions such as "highly unlikely" or
"a remote possibility"?
Does the doctor have to go to the extent of canvassing with the patient
alternative methods of conducting the relevant procedure? Must the doctor
canvass his or her own level of skill, and the existence, if it is the case, of
practitioners who have a higher level of skill or experience in relation to the
particular procedure?
There is plenty of scope for debate about the scope of the duty to advise of
risks. But advice on risks is only one matter for the medical practitioner to
address. In giving the advice, the doctor should consider and canvass medical
factors, the impact of different courses of action on the patient's quality of life,
the patient's own wishes, and the cost, certainly to the individual and probably as
well to the State. Presumably the prudent practitioner, in particular a specialist,
must keep abreast of the literature that deals with these matters.
It seems to me that there are some unresolved issues about the scope of the
duty to advise. As I have already said, they are not to be resolved by medical
practice, although evidence about the nature and extent of the risks, the
feasibility of explaining them to patients, and actual medical practice in this
respect will be relevant. Focusing on the duty to warn about risks tends to
obscure the fact that many other matters must be considered.
A Hard Case
Chappel v Hart13 was undoubtedly a hard case. The plaintiff underwent surgery
for removal of a pharyngeal pouch in her oesophagus. She was not warned of the
risk of injury to her pharyngeal nerve and the consequent risk of partial or total
loss of her voice. The court found that the operation was carried out with an
appropriate level of care and skill. During the operation the oesophagus was
perforated. This was one of the inherent risks of the procedure. It could happen
without any lack of care and skill. In the event of perforation, there was a chance
that if bacteria were present in the oesophagus, those bacteria could, as a result of
the perforation, cause infection. It was a matter of random chance whether
bacteria were or were not present at the crucial time. Infection from the escape of
bacteria, and consequent injury, was a very rare complication, but it ensued. This
resulted in some loss of voice for the plaintiff. The plaintiff claimed that the
surgeon had been negligent in failing to warn her of the risks of the operation.
She said that if she had received such a warning she would have explored the
possibility of having the most experienced surgeon available conduct the
operation. She would have deferred the operation. She asked specific questions
about the possibility of damage to her vocal chords. On the other hand, on the
evidence, the plaintiff had to have the operation sooner or later. The condition
from which she suffered was progressive.
The application of the principles enunciated in March v Stramare led the
majority and the minority in different directions. The majority approach was, in
substance, that there was a duty to inform the patient of the possible
consequences in the event of the perforation of her oesophagus and subsequent
infection, notwithstanding the relatively remote nature of that risk, and its
random nature. That duty was not performed, and the relevant risk eventuated.
The plaintiff had given evidence that if warned of the risk, she would have acted
to avoid or minimise the risk of injury, by seeking a more experienced surgeon.
The majority judgments seem to accept that the risk of injury would have been
reduced had the patient consulted a more experienced surgeon. To what extent it
would have been reduced, is not made clear. The majority also seem to proceed
on the basis that, the risk being remote and random, and having eventuated in
the case in question, had the patient had the operation at a later time, the risk of
injury then would have been minimal.
In other words, the majority proceeded on the basis that the damage that the
plaintiff suffered was reasonably foreseeable. There should have been a warning
about it. The very risk of which the patient should have been warned
materialised. If the surgery had been performed at a different time, or by a more
experienced surgeon, in all likelihood the patient would not have suffered the
random chance of injury. That summation is drawn from the reasons of
Gummow J14 who went on to consider whether (here was any good reason to
deny the plaintiff recovery upon the basis that injuries of the nature sustained by
the plaintiff might be caused without negligent performance of the procedure. He
found that there was no such reason. His conclusion was that it would be unjust
to absolve the doctor from legal responsibility "by allowing decisive weight to
hypothetical and problematic considerations of what could have happened to Mrs
Hart at the hands of some other practitioner at some unspecified later date and in
conditions of great variability".15
The dissenting view was, in essence, that the failure by the doctor to warn the
patient of the risk did not materially increase the risk of the plaintiff suffering the
injury. The negligent failure to warn had done no more than expose the patient to
a class of risk to which she would have been exposed in any event. In the opinion
of the minority, the plaintiff's claim should fail because she had not established
that there was any surgeon available of such skill that he or she would never
perforate the oesophagus. Nor did the evidence establish that there was any other
surgeon whose skills were so superior that an operation by that surgeon carried
with it a statistically significantly lesser risk of perforation than an operation by
the defendant. In the opinion of the dissentients the case was a "time and place"
case. That is, the negligence of the defendant had brought the plaintiff to the time
and place where the injury had occurred, but had not caused it.
My impression is that a point of distinction between the majority and the
minority is the firm view of the minority that nothing that the plaintiff would or
might have done if warned would have reduced the likelihood of the
complication occurring. My impression is that the majority were of the view that
the plaintiff might have reduced the risk, although they did not state the extent to
which she might have done so. It may be that that difference is the whole basis of
the departure in the reasoning.
The other strand in the majority reasoning is that it was the risk of which the
patient was not warned which eventuated and which caused injury, and that that
being so an evidentiary onus lay upon the doctor to displace the inference of
causation which thereupon arose, and that inference had not been displaced. In
the reasoning of Gummow J there is also a reference to the injustice of absolving
the medical practitioner from legal responsibility by reference to hypothetical and
problematic considerations. This shifting of the evidentiary onus is likely to
influence the outcome in borderline cases, and so has some practical significance,
The justification for this rule seems to be policy considerations.16 Whether this
rule is really fair, or does reflect sound policy, is open to argument.
We have to accept that there will be hard cases, but where does this one leave
us? The decision emphasises the onerous nature of the duty imposed on a doctor
to warn or advise a patient about the risks of surgery. The risk which eventuated
was remote, and pretty well unknown. The other point which emerges from the
case is that if the warning is not given, and the very risk not the subject of
warning eventuates, a court is likely on grounds of common sense or justice or
policy to find that the resulting injury is caused by the failure to give the
warning, even if the plaintiff finds it difficult to prove that he or she could have
done anything to reduce the risk of the relevant injury. My impression is that the
evidence for the plaintiff in Chappel v Hart that was said to show that, if warned,
she might have followed a course that would have reduced the risk of injury, was
slender indeed.
So what this seems to tell us is that considerations of policy or justice may
indeed play a significant part in ascribing responsibility.
A Hypothetical Case
In order to focus on the two matters to which this commentary is directed, I will
now postulate a hypothetical case, based on Chappel v Hart.
Assume that patient A consults doctor B with a view to undergoing a surgical
procedure. First of all, B must advise A about the procedure. As I have pointed
out, there are many factors to be considered when giving that advice. A
particular matter which must be covered is the risk associated with the
procedure. Certainly, the doctor must deal with the risk associated with the
doctor's own work. It is unclear whether and to what extent the doctor must deal
with risks involved in aspects of the procedure that are not under his or her
control. In advising about the risks, the doctor may have to explain some difficult
statistics, in a manner that is meaningful to the patient. It seems that the doctor
may need to advise the patient, if it is the case, that there are other practitioners
more skilled in performing the procedure if those greater skills might reduce the
incidence of a relevant risk.
The point I emphasise is that, important as the risks of surgery are, they are
only one matter for the patient's consideration. Prospects of success, and likely
outcomes, are also very important to the patient. There are other matters that the
doctor must consider.
I can well understand that from the practitioner's point of view the courts may
seem to be elevating advice about risks to an unreasonable level of significance.
But, probably betraying my own professional background, I find it difficult to
escape from the logic that insists upon the plaintiff being advised of adverse
outcomes before undergoing the procedure. The patient has a right to proper
advice before submitting to surgery. On the other hand, a point must be reached
at which the doctor has done what is reasonable. Identifying that point is not
easy in practice.
Let us now assume that the development of condition X, a harmful condition,
is a known but remote risk of the procedure. Let us assume that it is an inherent
risk. By this I mean it is one that can occur even though the procedure is carried
out properly. Assume that condition X is not so remote that the doctor is entitled
to disregard it. Assume that B does not give advice about condition X.
Let us assume that the procedure is carried out competently, but condition X
materialises. Has B's failure to advise caused the patient to suffer condition X?
Often those bare facts would suffice to establish legal liability for condition X.
There was a duty to warn about the risk, the warning was not given, the risk
ensued. But when the duty is a duty to inform so that a decision can be made, the
patient must prove what the patient would have done if warned.17
The court will conclude that the failure to warn caused A to suffer from
condition X only if A would, on receipt of the information and warning, have
acted to avoid or to minimise the risk of injury from condition X.18
Let us assume that the court concludes that if B had warned A, A would
nevertheless have undergone the procedure when she did undergo it. In that
situation the failure to warn has not caused A to suffer from condition X. The
lack of a warning is not the cause of the injury, because it was irrelevant to the
patient's decision to undergo the procedure that led to her suffering the injury.
Let us assume that the court concludes that having received the warning, the
patient would not have undergone the procedure at all. In that situation the
failure to warn is the cause of A suffering condition X. But for the failure, A
would not have undergone the procedure and would not have suffered condition
X.
What if, having received the warning, A would have deferred the procedure
while she considered the matter, and while she sought a second opinion. What if
A would then have submitted to the procedure, two weeks later? I assume for
present purposes that the risk of condition X occurring was exactly the same two
weeks later as it was when B carried out the procedure.
In this situation in my view the answer should be that the failure to warn has
not caused A to suffer from condition X. A's position is no different from the
position of the patient who would have proceeded to submit to the surgery
regardless of the warning if given. It can be said that A would not have suffered
condition X when she did, had the warning been given. We will never know
what would have happened had A had the operation two weeks later. But we do
know that if she had done that, she could not have suffered from condition X, if
at all, until two weeks later. Is that a basis to conclude that the failure to warn is
the cause of condition X?
In Chappel v Hart, some of the reasoning of Gaudron J suggests that in this
situation B will be held to have caused A to suffer from condition X. Gaudron J
said, referring to what would have happened if Dr Chappel had given Mrs Hart
adequate information:
If he had, Mrs Hart would not then have undergone surgery and would not then have suffered the
injuries which she did or the consequences. Thus, Dr Chappel's "breach" was "still operating", or,
"continued to be causally significant when [those injuries were sustained]". (Emphasis added).
That looks very much like the conclusion that if the failure to warn caused the
patient to suffer condition X when she suffered it, that suffices to establish
liability.
But can that conclusion be justified, other than on the further basis that the
risk of factor X occurring if the procedure was done two weeks later was less
than when it was actually done by B? I would have thought that it is only on this
basis that causation can be made out.
Pursuing that thought, can it be said that because the risk was remote and
random, and did ensue when B operated on A, that statistically it would not have
ensued two weeks later? That is, that the two week deferral means, as a matter of
statistics, that condition X would not have ensued if the procedure were deferred
for two weeks, or is extremely unlikely to have ensued? I do not know the correct
answer, as a matter of statistics. However, viewed prospectively, the chance of X
occurring is identical, whether the operation is today or two weeks later. In
retrospect, if X did occur when the operation was performed, it can be said that it
is unlikely that it would have occurred two weeks later. But I suggest that
considerations of policy and justice indicate that in this situation the conclusion
should be that B did not cause A to suffer from condition X. As McHugh J
argued,19 a defendant will be held liable for the plaintiff's injury only if the
defendant's wrongful act or omission results in an increased risk of injury to the
plaintiff and that risk eventuates. If the defendant's conduct does not increase the
risk of injury to the plaintiff, the defendant cannot be said to have materially
contributed to the injury suffered by the plaintiff. In this situation surely the
doctor has not increased the risk of injury. This is what I earlier referred to as a
"time and place situation". As McHugh J later pointed out, to hold the defendant
liable on this basis is simply to apply the "but for" test.20 On this point, Hayne J
agreed with McHugh J. As he pointed out, the evidence was that the risk of Mrs
Hart suffering the condition that she did suffer was such a remote risk that it is
very unlikely that it would have happened if the operation had been performed
on another day. But that is not enough to establish causation.21
However, the majority made statements that suggest that in this situation they
would have found that the failure to advise A about factor X was the cause of A
sustaining the injury. I am not completely confident of this, because the picture is
clouded by the fact that the majority accepted that the evidence supported a
finding that if Mrs Hart had been warned, she would have undergone the
operation later but at the hands of a more skilled surgeon, carrying with it a
reduced risk of injury occurring.22 But there are other observations that suggest
that even if the risk was the same at the later date, causation would still be made
out, because the risk of the injury materialising was so remote that one could say
fairly confidently that if the operation had been done on another day, Mrs Han
would not have suffered the same injury.23 It is not completely clear to me that
this is an independent basis for her decision, but it appears to be. Justice
Gummow reasoned that a risk of which there should have been a warning
materialised, and that if the surgery had been performed at a different time in all
likelihood Mrs Hart would not have suffered the random chance of injury.24 On
that basis, it was the task of Dr Chappel to demonstrate some "quite good reason"
for denying recovery. As to the risk of Mrs Hart sustaining an injury at the later
date, he again seems to have regarded the risk as one that would have been less,
because another and more skilled surgeon would have been retained.25 But he
also said:
It would, in the circumstances of the case, be unjust to absolve the medical practitioner from, legal
responsibility for her injuries by allowing decisive weight to hypothetical and problematic considerations
of what could have happened to Mrs Hart at the hands of some other practitioner at some unspecified
later date and in conditions of great variability.26
Justice Kirby also said that as causation was established by showing the breach
of duty, and as the risk against which there should have been a warning
eventuated, there was an onus upon Dr Chappel to displace the inference of
causation. He did not do so by proving that she would have been exposed to the
same or substantially the same possibility of like injury on another occasion. He
said: "On the contrary, the evidence demonstrated that the chances of her
receiving such injury in any other operation were minuscule."27
It is on the basis of those remarks that I conclude that the majority were
prepared to hold that in the situation presently under consideration, B is to be
found liable for having caused condition X. On that point, I respectfully disagree.
The majority approach leads to the conclusion that the more remote the risk of
condition X developing, the less likely it is to have occurred if the procedure were
deferred, and the easier it becomes to establish causation in a deferral situation.
What if, on the evidence, A would have deferred the operation, retained a
more expert surgeon, and had the procedure done with a significantly lesser
degree of risk? In that situation, which was also alluded to by the majority, there
is good reason to find that the failure to give the warning caused injury when
condition X materialised. The failure has increased the risk.
But a point not addressed in Chappel v Hart is the question of the extent to
which it is necessary to show that the risk of the condition being suffered would
have been less had the procedure been carried out on another occasion or by
another doctor. Is it sufficient to say that the risk wouid be less, without
quantifying the diminution in the risk? I suggest that the quantification needs to
be done, otherwise how can we say that the diminution in the risk is of any
practical significance? The majority in Chappel v Hart appear to disagree.
This is a difficult question to resolve. Common sense would tell us that a line
must be drawn somewhere. It cannot be that any reduction in risk no matter how
minimal will be sufficient to ground a finding of causation. But at what point do
we say that a reduction in risk is significant. Is a reduction in risk from 1 in 500 to
1 in 1000 significant? What about a reduction from 1 in 15,000 to 1 in 20,000?
In Chappel v Hart only McHugh J alluded to the possibility that not just any
reduction in risk would suffice, saying that it must be a "statistically significant
lesser risk".28 The remaining members of the High Court were content that the
risk be merely "less", "diminished" or "reduced". While it is clear that the court did
not consider such evidence in Chappel v Hart, the test suggested by McHugh J
raises the issue of whether it is possible, or appropriate, to resolve this problem by
reference to statistical tests designed to evaluate significance on a more or less
"objective" basis.
At first sight, the idea of using statistical analysis to give us an objective
answer to our question of significance is an attractive one. If such analysis were
possible it would solve the difficulty of where the line is to be drawn.
While I do not pretend to be a statistician, my understanding is that in some
circumstances there is very little statistical analysis which can be meaningfully
carried out in respect of only two pieces of data. Thus, if all we know is that the
risk of injury if Doctor A performs the procedure is X and the risk of injury if
Doctor B performs the procedure is Y, statistical analysis cannot assist in deciding
whether that reduction in risk (from X to Y) is significant let alone important -
that is, important relative to what? This means that we must rely upon a
subjective analysis by the courts of the relative risks involved. Perhaps this is not
such a bad thing. Certainly it avoids submitting the law to what Kirby J described
as "the paralysis of statistical abstractions".29 But that does not mean that we
should be content with the approach adopted by the remaining members of the
court which did not involve any explicit analysis of the reduction in risk at all. In
my opinion there must be a real inquiry into whether, in all the circumstances of
the case, the reduction in risk is important.
Determining the significance of a reduction in risk of injury is a critical issue
and one which may ultimately be determinative in cases like Chappel v Hart. As
such it is an issue which should in future cases be explicitly addressed. While it
would not appear to be possible for courts to engage in any sense in a truly
statistical analysis of risk, the level of analysis must surely go beyond a mere
finding that there was some reduction.
An analysis of the importance of a reduction in risk will in many, if not most,
cases be a difficult one and one in which many considerations will need be taken
into account. I do not attempt in this paper to canvass all of those considerations.
I do, however, mention three in order to demonstrate that such an analysis will
not necessarily be a straightforward one.
First, it is necessary to consider absolute as well as relative changes in
outcomes. A 50 per cent decrease in the incidence of injury will be far more
important if that represents a change from one in 50 cases to one in 100 cases
than if it represents a change from one in 500 cases to one in 1000 cases. Secondly,
the severity and permanence of injury must be taken into account. The more
serious and debilitating the injury the more important will be a small reduction
in the probability that the injury will occur. Finally, when assessing the
importance of a reduction in risk it is necessary, as indeed the courts have
emphasised in the past, to consider the particular concerns and circumstances of
the patient involved. Where the risk is loss of eyesight, and the patient is
particularly concerned about that or is already blind in one eye, the weight
attached to any reduction in risk is likely to be higher.
Conclusion
Chappel v Hart was certainly a difficult test. A close reading of the reasons
suggests that it exposes a number of difficult issues in the area of advice about
risks. And, I suggest, there are plenty of difficulties lurking in the issue of the
duty to advise. As so often happens in the law, March v Stramare has bedded
down one set of principles, but its application has immediately exposed new
issues that will test the courts.
* The Chief Justice of South Australia.
1 (1991) 171 CLR 507.
2 Mason CJ at 516.
3 (1992) 176 CLR 408.
4 (1998) 195 CLR 232.
5 (1992) 175 CLR 479.
6 (1998) 195 CLR 232 at 264.
7 29 August 1995, Melbourne, "Litigation versus Science: What's Driving Decision Making in Medicine?"
8 Fitzgerald v Penn (1954) 91 CLR 268 at 277.
9 At 278.
10 (1998) 195 CLR 232 at 269.
11 (1991) 171 CLR 507 at 524.
12 (1992) 175 CLR 479 at 490.
13 (1998) 195 CLR 232.
14 At 257.
15 At 262.
16 See the discussion by Kirby J at 273.
17 Gaudron J at 268; Kirby J at 239.
18 Gaudron J at 262.
19 At 244.
20 At 251.
21 At 283-4.
22 Gaudron J at 241; Kirby J at 271.
23 See, for example, Gaudron J at 241-2.
24 At 257.
25 See at 260.
26 At 262.
27 At 278.
28 At 249.
29 At 275.