Ch4: Case Study – FCAPS System
             (Greenfield System Development)


Designing Software Architectures – A Practical Approach
                Cervantes & Kazman ©2016
              The SEI Series in Software Engineering
Business Case / 1
• In 2006, a large telecommunications company wanted to expand its
  Internet Protocol (IP) network to support “carrier-class services”, and
  more specifically high-quality voice over IP (VOIP) systems.

• One important aspect to achieve this goal was synchronization of the
  VOIP servers and other equipment.
   • Poor synchronization results in low quality of service (QoS), degraded
     performance, and unhappy customers.
   • To achieve the required level of synchronization, the company wanted to deploy
     a network of time servers that support the Network Time Protocol (NTP).
Business Case / 2
• Time servers are formed into groups that typically correspond to
  geographical regions.

• Within these regions, time servers are organized hierarchically in levels
  or strata, where time servers placed in the upper level of the hierarchy
  (stratum 1) are equipped with hardware (e.g., Cesium Oscillator, GPS
  signal) that provides precise time.
   • Time servers that are lower in the hierarchy use NTP to request time from
     servers in the upper levels or from their peers.
Business Case / 3
• Many pieces of equipment depend on the time provided by time servers
  in the network, so one priority for the company was to correct any
  problems that occur on the time servers.
   • Such problems may require dispatching a technician to perform physical
     maintenance on the time servers, such as rebooting.

• Another priority for the company was to collect data from the time
  servers to monitor the performance of the synchronization framework.

• In the initial deployment plans, the company wanted to field 100 time
  servers of a particular model.
Business Case / 4
• Besides NTP, time servers support the Simple Network Management Protocol
  (SNMP), which provides three basic operations:
   • set() operations: change configuration variables (e.g., connected peers)
   • get() operations: retrieve configuration variables or performance data
   • trap() operations: notifications of exceptional events such as the loss or restoration of the
     GPS signal or changes in the time reference.

• To achieve the company’s goals, a management system for the time servers
  needed to be developed.
   • This system needed to conform to the FCAPS model, which is a standard model for
     network management.

• Once the initial network was deployed, the company planned to extend it by
  adding time servers from newer models that might potentially support
  management protocols other than SNMP.
FCAPS Model
• Fault management. To recognize, isolate, correct, and log faults that occur in the network.
    • In this case, these faults correspond to traps generated by time servers or other problems such as loss of
      communication between the management system and the time servers.
• Configuration management. Gathering and storing configurations from network devices, thereby
  simplifying the configuration of devices and tracking changes made to device configurations.
    • In this system, besides changing individual configuration variables, it is necessary to be able to deploy a
      specific configuration to several time servers.
• Accounting. To gather device information.
    • In this context, this includes tracking device hardware and firmware versions, hardware equipment, and
      other components of the system.
• Performance management. Determining the efficiency of the current network. By collecting and
  analyzing performance data, the network health can be monitored.
    • In this case, delay, offset, and jitter measures are collected from the time servers.
• Security management. Controlling access to assets in the network.
    • In this case, there are two important types of users: technicians and administrators.
        • Technicians can visualize trap information and configurations but cannot make changes;
        • Administrators are technicians who can visualize the same information but can also make changes to configurations,
          including adding and removing time servers from the network.
Architectural Drivers
1. Use-case Model
2. Quality Attribute Scenarios
3. Constraints
4. Architectural Concerns
(1) Use-case
Model
(2) Quality
Attribute
Scenarios
(3) Constraints
(4) Architectural Concerns
The
Design
Process
(ADD 3.0)

ADD: Attribute
Driven Design
     Step-1: Review inputs / 1
     • The first step of the ADD method involves reviewing the inputs.
       They are summarized in the table below.




UC-1: Monitor network status
UC-2: Detect fault
UC-7: Collect performance data
Step-1:
Review
inputs / 2
Architectural
   Drivers
The Desing Process
• Three iterations of ADD-3.0 is planned:

  • Iteration 1: Establishing an Overall System Structure

  • Iteration 2: Identifying Structures to Support Primary Functionality

  • Iteration 3: Addressing Quality Attribute Scenario Driver (QA-3)
The Desing Process
ITERATION - 1
Iteration 1: Establishing an Overall System Structure /
Step 2: Establish Iteration Goal by Selecting Drivers
• Iteration goal is to achieve the architectural concern CNR-1 of
  establishing an overall system structure.
   • Although this iteration is driven by a general architectural concern, the architect
     must keep in mind all of the drivers that may influence the general structure of
     the system.
   • In particular, the architect must be mindful of the following:
      • QA-1: Performance
      • QA-2: Modifiability
      • QA-3: Availability
      • QA-4: Performance
      • CON-2: System must be accessed through a web browser in different platforms
          • i.e., Windows, OSX, and Linux
      • CON-3: A relational database server must be used
      • CON-4: Network connection to users workstations can have low bandwidth and be unreliable
      • CRN-2: Leverage team’s knowledge about Java Technologies.
Iteration 1: Establishing an Overall System Structure /
Step 3: Choose One or More Elements of the System to Refine
• This is a greenfield development effort, so in this case the element to refine is the entire
  FCAPS system, which is shown in Figure 4.2.
    • In this case, refinement is performed through decomposition.
Iteration 1: Establishing an Overall System Structure /
Step 4: Choose One/More Design Concepts That Satisfy the Selected Drivers / 1
Iteration 1: Establishing an Overall System Structure /
Step 4: Choose One/More Design Concepts That Satisfy the Selected Drivers / 2
Iteration 1: Establishing an Overall System Structure /
Step 5: Instantiate Arch. Elements, Allocate Responsibilities & Define Interfaces




In this initial iteration, it is typically too early to precisely define functionality and interfaces. In the next
iteration, which is dedicated to defining functionality in more detail, interfaces will begin to be defined.
Iteration 1: Establishing an Overall System Structure /
Step 6: Sketch Views and Record Design Decisions / 1
Iteration 1: Establishing an Overall System Structure /
Step 6: Sketch Views and Record Design Decisions / 2
Iteration 1: Establishing an Overall System Structure /
Step 6: Sketch Views and Record Design Decisions / 3
Iteration 1: Establishing an Overall System Structure /
Step 7: Perform Analysis of Current Design and Review Iteration Goal and
Achievement of Design Purpose / 1
Iteration 1: Establishing an Overall System Structure /
Step 7: Perform Analysis of Current Design and Review Iteration Goal and
Achievement of Design Purpose / 2
The Desing Process
ITERATION - 2
Iteration 2: Identifying Structures to Support
Primary Functionality
• In this iteration, we move from the generic and coarse-grained descriptions
  of functionality used in iteration-1 to more detailed decisions that will drive
  implementation and hence the formation of development teams.
   • We cannot design everything up front, so we need to be disciplined about which
     decisions we make, and when, to ensure that the design is done in a systematic way,
     addressing the biggest risks first and moving from there to ever finer details.

• Our new goal for this second iteration is to reason about the units of
  implementation, which affect team formation, interfaces, and the means
  by which development tasks may be distributed, outsourced, and
  implemented in sprints.
Iteration 2: Identifying Structures to Support Primary Functionality /
Step 2: Establish Iteration Goal by Selecting Drivers


• The goal of this iteration is to address the general architectural
  concern of identifying structures to support primary functionality.
   • Identifying these elements is useful not only for understanding how
     functionality is supported, but also for addressing CRN-3—that is, the
     allocation of work to members of the development team.

• In this second iteration, besides CRN-3, the architect considers the
  system’s primary use cases:
   • UC-1: Monitor network status
   • UC-2: Detect fault
   • UC-7: Collect performance data
Iteration 2: Identifying Structures to Support Primary Functionality /
Step 3: Choose One or More Elements of the System to Refine


• The elements that will be refined in this iteration are the modules
  located in the different layers defined by the two reference
  architectures from the previous iteration.

• In general, the support of functionality in this system requires the
  collaboration of components associated with modules that are
  located in the different layers.
Iteration 2: Identifying Structures to Support Primary Functionality /
Step 4: Choose One or More Design Concepts That Satisfy the Selected Drivers / 1


• In this iteration, several design concepts—in this case, architectural design patterns—are selected
  from the book Pattern Oriented Software Architecture, Volume 4.
Iteration 2: Identifying Structures to Support Primary Functionality /
Step 4: Choose One or More Design Concepts That Satisfy the Selected Drivers / 2
Iteration 2: Identifying Structures to Support Primary Functionality /
Step 4: Choose One or More Design Concepts That Satisfy the Selected Drivers / 3


• The words in bold in the following table refer to architectural patterns from that book.
Iteration 2: Identifying Structures to Support Primary Functionality /
Step 5: Instantiate Architectural Elements, Allocate Responsibilities, and Define Interfaces
Iteration 2: Identifying Structures to Support Primary Functionality /
Step 6: Sketch Views and Record Design Decisions / 1
Iteration 2: Identifying Structures to Support Primary Functionality /
Step 6: Sketch Views and Record Design Decisions / 2
Iteration 2: Identifying Structures to Support Primary Functionality /
Step 6: Sketch Views and Record Design Decisions / 3
Iteration 2: Identifying
Structures to Support
Primary Functionality /
Step 6: Sketch Views and Record
Design Decisions / 4
Iteration 2: Identifying
Structures to Support
Primary Functionality /
Step 6: Sketch Views and Record
Design Decisions / 5
Iteration 2: Identifying Structures to Support Primary Functionality /
Step 7: Perform Analysis of Current Design and Review Iteration Goal and Achievement of Design Purpose
The Desing Process
ITERATION - 3
Iteration 3: Addressing Quality Attribute Scenario Driver (QA-3) /
Steps 2 & 3

    • Step 2: Establish Iteration Goal by Selecting Drivers
       • For this iteration, the architect focuses on the QA-3 quality attribute scenario:
          • "A failure occurs in the management system during operation. The management system
            resumes operation in less than 30 seconds."


    • Step 3: Choose One or More Elements of the System to Refine
       • For this availability scenario, the elements that will be refined are the physical
         nodes that were identified during the first iteration:
          • Application server
          • Database server
Iteration 3: Addressing Quality Attribute Scenario Driver (QA-3) /
Step 4: Choose One or More Design Concepts That Satisfy the Selected Drivers
Iteration 3: Addressing Quality Attribute Scenario Driver (QA-3) /
Step 5: Instantiate Architectural Elements, Allocate Responsibilities, and Define Interfaces
Iteration 3: Addressing Quality Attribute Scenario Driver (QA-3) /
Step 6: Sketch Views and Record Design Decisions / 1
Iteration 3: Addressing Quality Attribute Scenario Driver (QA-3) /
Step 6: Sketch Views and Record Design Decisions / 2


                                                       The figure illustrates how the
                                                       TrapReceiver that was introduced in this
                                                       iteration exchanges messages with other
                                                       elements shown in the deployment
                                                       diagram to support UC-2 (detect fault),
                                                       which is associated with both QA-3
                                                       (availability) and QA-1 (performance).

                                                       As the purpose of this diagram is to
                                                       illustrate the communication that occurs
                                                       between the physical nodes, the names
                                                       of the methods are only preliminary; they
                                                       will be refined in further iterations.
Iteration 3: Addressing Quality Attribute Scenario Driver (QA-3) /
Step 7: Perform Analysis of Current Design and Review Iteration Goal and Achievement of Design Purpose
